PART I 
 
GENERAL 
CHAPTER I 
Present Economic Conditions 
The history of planned process of economic development in Nepal is short. Before 1951, some development activities were undertaken but their scope was very limited. Among them were limited programmes to develop power and drinking water facilities in Kathmandu, health programmes in a few districts, some schools, and a college, a commercial bank, a few roads and some small-scale irrigation works. The abolition of slavery in 1925 was the most significant social measure. But as a result of various political and geographic conditions, Nepal remained isolated behind other countries in its social and economic development. However, the economic stimulus of World War II led to the establishment of the first modern industrial units Nepal. Many of these failed to survive the immediate post-war period because of poor management and lack of technical knowledge. Only very recently attention has been given to feasibility studies and the other prerequisites of sound industrial development. 
Even after the political changes of 1951-52 relatively little progress was made. The difficulties of changing the political and administrative structure were largely responsible. 
First Five Year Plan (First Plan) 
Serious efforts to plan economic development took place after the establishment of a Planning Board in 1955. The First Five Year Plan, prepared by the Board, covered the 1956-61 periods. 
       Because of the Bird’s limited knowledge and experience, there were serious shortcomings in the Plan itself. Despite this, some significant results were achieved, although expenditures were only Rs. 210 millions or Rs. 42 millions annually. Little progress occurred in road, power, and industrial development. But the Plan did stimulate public interest in, and support of planning. Government was made aware of the requirement for planned development. There was significant progress in the fields of education and health. Overall, however, the plan made little4 headway creating the necessary base for economic development. 
The Three Year Plan (Second Plan) 
A significant result of the First Plan was the recognition of the conditions required for successful planning and project implementation. It was realized that a plan formulated without detailed knowledge of actual conditions and the development potential of the several was of limited usefulness. A plan must, moreover, take full account of administrative relationships and the limited financial and other resources available. 
At the time the Second Plan was prepared, knowledge of economic conditions in Nepal was still extremely limited. In the absence of survey and studies of natural recourses, agricultural output national income and other economic variables, existing economic conditions could not be accurately ascertained. It was not possible, therefore, to set overall targets and goals in quantitative terms. The absence in data also prevented the formulation of a long range perspective planning within which the Second Plan was to operate. Recognizing these limitations, Second Plan Sectoral targets were fixed in terms of Nepal’s ability to finance and imp lement the development programme. 
       Because of the existing shortcomings, the Second Plan gave priority to activities which would the base for more comprehensive future plans. Emphasis was given to the collection of data on economic conditions organizational reform and improvement, and the development of the economic infrastructure. Priority was given to survey and statistical activities agricultural reform, organizational improvement and training. The other areas given emphasis were transport and communications, power, and m agriculture, agricultural extension work and irrigation. In the industrial sector, emphasis was placed on the completion of projects already underway. For social services, efforts were directed more at the improvement than the expansion of schools and health centre. For the implementation of the programmes under the above mentioned priority scale, an outlay of Rs. 600 million was programmed. An additional Rs 70 million was to be made available as loans to the private sector for investment in agriculture and industry. 
Three Year Plan Progress 
During the Second Plan, the progress made was significant from the point of view of rapid economic development. The planned outlay in the public sector was virtually achieved. Table 1 gives the financial allocations and actual expenditures during the Second Plan. 
Out of the Rs 70 million allocated to the private sector, Rs 25 millions were al resettlement and industrial development loans. In the public sector, the largest amount was spent on power development. Substantial sums were also allotted to industry, roads and irrigation. These allocations are commensurate to with the priorities established in the original plan. 
 
 
1	Includes Co -operatives 
2	This covers only hydrological survey. Other surveys are included in departmental totals for the several sections. 
3	Accountant training and engineering college expenditures are included. 
4	Includes railway and ropeway. 
5	Includes mining. 
6	Included in irrigation expenditures. 
7	Includes building, planning, revolving, contingency, and other expenditures. 
Table 1, appears to indicate a considerable shortfall in expenditures for survey and training. This is misleading since expenditures on these activities, although separately shown in the target figures, are included in the departmental totals of realized magnitudes. Expenditures incurred for the forest resources and botanical surveys, mineral exploration, surveys of irrigation and power potential and in the transport sector are in the respective departmental totals. The same goes for training expenditures in such fields as agriculture, cooperatives, cadastral survey and the like. 
Even in terms of physical objectives the Plan targets have, on the whole, been achieved. The population census, sample agricultural survey, a national income estimate and other statistical and survey activities have provided greater knowledge about the economy. 
Development budget expenditures increase annually over the Second Plan period and represents, in monetary terms, improvements made in administrative efficiency and th4e absorptive capacity of Nepal. In 1962- 63, the first year of the plan, Rs 70 million were spent. In the second year, development budget expenditures rose to Rs 147 million, In the final year expenditures were Rs 180 million, excluding projects supported by Indian Aid, which were added in th4 supplementary budget. 
In addition to administrative reform, land reforms were started during the Second Plan. Their purpose is to modernize agriculture and provide incentives for increasing production. Significant progress has been achieved in industry, transport and power. The present position of the several sectors of the economy is given in the following sections: 
Agriculture 
Nepal’s agricultural output depends very heavily on climatic conditions. During 1963-64, the second year of the Second Plan, whether conditions adversely affected agricultural output. In the first and third years, weather conditions were normal and did not adversely affect production. 
It is estimated, however, that agricultural output increased over the plan period as a whole as a result of programmes undertaken His Majesty’s Government. The expansion of existing units and the establishment of new factories have encouraged cash crop production with a resultant increase in output. 
Although still far from adequate, the agricultural extension services have has positive effects. These include improved seed, implements, fertilizers and plant protection facilities. Irrigation has also been provided on an additional 100,000 areas. Institutional improvements have also been made. The Agricultural Reorganization and the Cooperative Bank Acts of 1962 were steps in this direction. The Agricultural Reorganization Act was implemented in selected gram panchyats of Jhapa, Palpa and Chitwan dis tricts. The programme surveyed the land holdings, identified the tiller, fixed rents, gave security of tenure to tenants and modernized administrative procedures. Under the Land Reform Act of 1964, efforts are being made to extend the programme to the whole country. The results to date are encouraging. The programme involving cadastral survey, identifications of the tillers and collection of savings has been virtually completed in seven districts. All phases except the cadastral survey have also been undertaken in another nine districts. This programme is designed to give greater incentive to the4 cultivator to expand output. 
Table 2; give production estimates of selected crops for the years 1961-62 and 1964-65. The data are secured from the Agricultural Census and the Department of Agriculture 
Industry 
Significant progress in the industrial sector has been achieved during the Three Year Plan. With the establishment of new units and the modernization and expansion of existing plants, industrial output in selected sectors has increased significantly as shown in Table 3(A). 
3 
Table 3(A), does not give a full picture of recent industrial development. As a result of the increased attention given by Government and of the assistance provided by the Nepal Industrial Development Corporation, a variety of new production units have been established. Among these are plants manufacturing cotton and woolen textiles, iron products, and utensils. A leather and shoe factory has also been established in the public sector. 
The growing industrial activities in Nepal can be well realized by the growing number of industrial firms during the past few years, which are shown in the table 3(B) below. 
Transport and Communication 
Transport and communication difficulties have been major obstacles to the rapid economic development of Nepal. Although progress was made during the Second Plan, further expansion is essential to bring modern transport facilities to most areas of Nepal. The Raxaul-Bhainse and the Kathmandu-Kodari roads have been major road construction programmes. Work was started East-West Highway and the Sunauli-Pokhara road. 
In the aviation sector, the Gaucher cross runway will be finished in the first year of the Third Plan. Improvement work is also underway on other airports. In telecommunications, seen areas control stations and 50 satellite stations have been established. A new radio link was initiated between New Delhi and Kathmandu. In addition to increasing internal postal service, international parcel and insurance services were also started. 
Power 
Work on power development has moved slower than planned but, in the light of the difficulties faced, quite satisfactorily. Difficulties in transporting machinery and equipment and periodic labour shortages have delayed work. By the end of 1965, 7,600 k. w., of new generation facilities will be operative. This includes 3,000 at Trisuli, 2,400 k. w. at Panauti, 10,000 k. w. will become available in 1966 from Trisuli and Hetauda. 
 
Education 
There has been considerable progress in the field of education. There were 13 colleges, 85 high schools, 300 secondary and 1,200 primary schools at the beginning of the First Plan. During the First Plan, the number of primary schools rose to over 4,000 and enrollment increased to nearly 200,000. The number of secondary schools rose to 500. Multi-purpose high schools were also established. Colleges increased to 31 in number and the only university in Nepal was established. Teacher training and adult education programmes were started. 
During the Second Plan, emphasis was placed upon improving rather than expanding education facilities. The number of primary students increased from 1990,000 to 346,000. The proportion of school age children receiving primary education rose from 15.3 per cent to 27 percent. Secondary schools increased from 500 to 660 and the number of secondary schools students was approximately 40,000 by the end of the Plan. The adult education students have been enrolled to date. 
The Population Census of 1952— 54 revealed a 4.4 percent literary rate in Nepal. The Census of 1961-62 showed an increase in the literary rate to 8.9 percent. There has undoubtedly been a further rise since that time. 
Health 
Health facilities in Nepal fall below the standards of most countries in the world. Considerable progress has, however, been made. At present 42 government hospitals with some 1,000 beds available. In addition, health centres and health posts have been established in the villages to provide facilities for as many people as possible. 
 
Malaria eradication work has been completed the central zone of Nepal in which 2, 400,000 persons reside. Eradication work is underway in the eastern zone covering 1,300,000 persons. Smallpox and leprosy control programmes has been started. The maternity and child care programme has been explained. Efforts have been made to improve sanitary conditions. 
International Resources 
In the last few years, there has been considerable progress in the mobilization of international resources. Governmental revenue which was Rs 90 million in 1961-62 has increased to Rs 158 million by 1064-65. Because of the expansion of industrial activity and higher income levels, income from customs and excise taxes rose considerably. Receipts from land revenue rose with as upward adjustment of tax rates. Direct taxes have also been imposed and the receipts are rising. The establishment of new government corporations and better management of existing units have added to the divided income of government. 
As a result of this striking expansion of governmental receipts, more internal resources have been made available for the development budget. Only a few years ago, Nepal’s development budget was almost wholly dependent on foreign aid. During the First Plan, Nepal’s dependence on foreign assistance increased. In 1958 -29, 29 percent of the public sector development expenditures were internally financed. This ratio fell to six percent in 1960-61. In the Second Plan period, this trend was reversed. The Plan called for financing Rs 670 million of which 110 million or 17 percent of proposed expenditures were to be met by the internal resources. The actual contribution amounted to 24 percent of the total. 
Trade 
During the Second Plan, efforts were made to diversify trade. It is not possible to measure the success of these efforts since the required data for recent years are not yet available. Some indication of the trend can be secured, however, from comparisons of available data on past years. 
In 1957-58, exports were reported at Rs 70 million. In 1960-61, recorded exports were some Rs 210 million and rose to Rs 265.2 million in 1961-629. Imports during this period rose rapidly as a result of increased incomes and as expansion of developmental activities. In 1957-58, imports were recorded at Rs 160 million and by 1960-61 they had increased to Rs 400 million. In 1961-62, they further to Rs 440 million. Although the trade is still predominantly with India, trade with other countries is gradually increasing. Table 4 gives export-import data based on licenses issued by the Commerce Development for the 1961-64 periods. This covers only trade with oversea countries. 
       The volume of tourist traffic of Nepal has been increasing steadily. In 1958, 2,756 tourists visited Nepal. 
By 1963, the number had increased to 7,750. During 1964 there was a further increase to 9,976. Further expansion is possible as airline and hotel facilities become more adequate. The earning from tourism is expected to rise rapidly in the future. 
Conclusion: 
The above facts indicate the achievements of the Second Plan. Although Nepal underwent a revolutionary political change in 1951, it has been only very recently that the tempo of economic activity has expanded significantly. The Nepalese economy in still in a very early stage of development. Gross domestic product in 1961-62 is estimated at Rs 3,680 million. For 1964-65, the value of output has been tentatively put at Rs 5,280 million. This gives an increase of 43 percent over the three year period of which reflects price rather than output increases. Accordingly, per capita income in estimated at Rs 570 ($68). This is below the per capita incomes of India, Pakistan and Ceylon which, in 1963, were estimated at $73, $74 and $ 137 respectively. In the United States, at the other extreme, per capita income is over $2,500. 
Ninety-three percent of the population of Nepal is dependent on agriculture which contributes 65 percent of gross domestic product. Because of primitive cultivation Techniques, yields per acre are very low. The industrial sector is just getting started and contributes a small fraction of total output. Its activities are confined mostly to processing agricultural products. Transport, communication and power facilities are inadequate to meet Nepal’s needs. The literacy rate is among the lowest in world and life expectancy at birth is 32 years. 
The low income level of Nepal indicates that savings arte also very small. This limits the volume of investments which can be financed internally and makes it even more imperative that the limited resources be used productively for the benefit of the nation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9The export figures do not measure actual exports since raw jute, timber, leather and other products which did not have to pay an export tax were not recorded. In addition, taxable commodities were, to some extent, smuggled across the border and thus not recorded. The Central Bureau of Statistics estimates the exports of 1961-65 at Rs 4000.0 million instead of the recorded Rs. 265 millions. 
These are licensing rather those actual values. Actual figures are undoubtedly smaller. 
 

CHAPTER II 
Objectives and Priorities 
 
As mentioned earlier, income levels are among the lowest in the world. The task facing the nation is to improve the economic condition of its citizens as rapidly as possible. Nepal must accomplish the task within a few decades what other nations have taken a much longer period to achieve. As His Majesty has stated, “if we want to raise Nepal to the level of other developed countries, we have to accomplish 10 or 20 years what they took centuries to do.” To achieve this accelerated development, available resources particularly human, must be fully and effectively utilized. To ensure full mobilization of these resources, Nepal has adopted the method of planned economic development. The effectiveness of planning as a means of stimulating development has been demonstrated in other countries as well as Nepal. 
 
Social Objectives 
 
The social objectives of the Third Plan have their origin in the planning process begun in 1956, and are defined within the framework of the guidelines set forth in the Constitution of Nepal: 
1. 	The aim of the State shall be to promote the welfare of the people by securing and protecting as just social order which brings about harmony in the national life by integrating and consolidating the interests of different classes and professions from a comprehensive national outlook. 
2. 	Towards the fulfillment of the objectives laid down in clause (1) such policy, in particular, shall be followed as a result of which- 
a. 	All citizens may have equal opportunity and facility to develop their personality and to make economic progress ; 
b. 	Citizens may have reasonable and adequate means of livelihood ; and 
c. 	The ownership and control of the material resources of the community are so regulated as may bring about equitable distribution of wealth and as may best sub serve the common good and also afford reasonable protection and encouragement to private enterprise in the allotted sectors of industry and trade. 
The above objectives are intended to promote the welfare of the people of Nepal in the process of economic development. To increase total output is not enough. It is also necessary to distribute the output equitably. Although the primary objectives must of necessity be to increase productivity and total output, the distribution aspect must also be considered by a nation concerned with the welfare of its citizens. 
The Panchayat System and National Development 
For rapid economic development the social and political structure must stimulated rather than hinder the growth process. As Nepal’s own experience since 1960 has shown, political stability is one necessary condi tion. In the social field, all citizens should have an opportunity to develop their capacities to the fullest extent and be able to secure gainful and productive employment. To accomplish the desired results, conscription for work and distinction based upon caste, religion and sex must be eliminated. Education, medical care employment opportunity must be made available to all. 
To achieve the goal of social justice, steps should be taken to eliminate gradually the concentration of wealth in a small group and to reduce the income gap between the few and the many. Care must be taken, however to ensure that adequate incentives for work and investment are also provided. To accomplish this, new organizations need to be established and operated under necessary rules and regulations. 
Political Stability, the elimination of socially undesirable systems, and changes in organizational structure are imperative for the success of any development plan. But these alone are not sufficient. There must also be a gradual evolution of the political, social and economic system in response to changing conditions to allow the necessary flexibility while adhering to the basic social objectives. Such a system must be close to the people and responsive to their needs. Its scope should not be restrictive but should cover all aspects of social and economic activities. 
The panchayat system is the medium through which the constitutional objectives are to be met. More specifically, the panchayat structure designed to create the institutional arrangements necessary for the political, social and economic growth of the nation. It will involve the people at all levels of administrative and executive action within the country. In view of the basic objectives, all important activities must be undertaken with in the framework of the panchyat system. 
His Majesty’s Government has committed itself to a decentralization policy which will further strength the zonal, district and village panchayats. The Preamble to the Constitution states-  Whereas it is desirable in the best interest and for the full development of the Kingdom of Nepal and of the Nepalese people to conduct the government of the country in consonance with the popular will, and originating from the very base with the active cooperation of the whole people’ it embodies the4 principles of decentralization. 
The panchayat system is not only a framework but also the means for the implementation of the development effort. The success of any nation-wide development plan depends upon the active support and cooperation of the people. The contribution of the panchayat system in mobilizing local resources and labour has also been important. 
 
The Long Run Perspective 
 
In order to plan effectively many countries prepare long term perspective plan covering up to 25 years. Nepal cannot prepare such a long term plan because of the lack of necessary statistical data. In the absence of a long term perspective, the targets of short range programme such as the five year plan are limited and possibly even conflicting. For example, in the five year plan, the various sectoral programmes must be coordinated. These programme are, a part of a continuing process reflecting past activities as well as future plans. Therefore, long term goals for each sector are essential. These are particularly necessary in such as power, transport and education. 
A long term target of doubting national income in fifteen years has been set. This may appear ambitious in terms of past achievements. The target appears feasible, however, on the basis of the experience of other developing nations. To achieve this, national income must increase at an annual rate of 4.7 percent. In view of the present level of utilization of available resources, such a rate of growth neither does nor appears feasible in the near future. The rate can, however, be expected to rise above it over the fifteen year period. 
The rate of population increase for the past few years in estimated at two per cent and is expected to remain at this during the Third Plan. It is estimated to rise to 2.2 per cent in the following five years and then to 2.4 per cent. Based upon the population projection, per capita real income will increase 62 per cent by 1980. 
As a result of steps taken during the Second Plan, it is now possible to determine long term targets in  some sectors of the economy. The development of transport and power are two basis requirements for economic growth. Roads are the primary means of transport on Nepal. A long term road development programme has been prepared which calls for 2,500 miles of road construction over the twenty year. Free and compulsory primary education will be provided nationally by 1980 in accordance with UNESCO targets. In some sectors, major projects will take relative long periods of time to complete. One major hydro-electric project on the Karnali, for example, may take eight to ten years. To coordinate these several programmes, a long term perspective plan is needed. 
 
Third Plan Targets 
The national income target of the Third Plan is to achieve a total increase of 19 per cent. This will give a nine per cent increase in per cent income over the plan period, assuming a population growth of two per cent per year. This is not ambitious in terms of doubting income over the next plan periods, but it does appear ambitious in the light of the present absorptive capacity of the economy. 
The Plan calls for total expenditure of Rs 2,500 million in public and private sectors. Of this, Rs 520 million will be spent on the private sector, Rs 240 million by district and village panchayats on district and local development activity, as distinguished from public sector expenditures by the central government. During the Second Plan, development expenditures in the public sector averaged Rs 200 million per year as compared with the projected Third Plan average of Ts 350 million. In the last year of the Second Plan, however, expenditures in the public sector alone amounted to Rs 260 million. They are expected to rise gradually over the next five years. 
 
Objectives of the Third Plan 
 
The primary objective is to develop the prerequisite for rapid economic growth. The Plan must, however, encompass programmes designed to meet immediate problems as well as those which are essential to future growth. More specific objectives are given below: 
 
Agriculture Production 
 
In order to achieve the target of increasing total output by 19 per cent, agricultural production must rise. The increase can be achieved by introducing modern techniques to replace the existing primitive practices. The experience of India demonstrates that rapid economic growth cannot occur unless agriculture is properly developed. This is particularly important in the case of food production. Unless food production expands, price rise and inflationary pressures becomes acute. 
 
Institutional Reform 
One of the objectives of economic development in Nepal is to move labour out of agriculture in to other productive activities. A rapid expansion of agricultural output will enable Nepal to overcome her present dependence on agriculture. 
It is necessary not only to increase investment on agriculture but also to expand investment opportunities outside of agriculture. The feudalistic system in the rural areas if Nepal must be brought to an end. The economic condition of the tiller is adversely affected by insecurity of tenure, high rents and high interest rates. A primary objective of the Third Plan, therefore, is to improve the condition of the tiller by effectively implementing the land reform programme. 
 
Economic Infrastructure 
It is also essential to develop transportation and power. Their development will increase agricultural output and lead to a more efficient market system. Transport difficulties have been among the primary barriers to development, particularly of the hill region of Nepal. Only the first steps have yet been taken in transport and power development. 
 
Industrial Development 
 
Industrialization is an essential component of economic growth. However, development of industries requires a reasonable level of agricultural and infrastructure development. The Plan, therefore, aims at developing industries wherever feasible. 
Industrial development can occur in both the public and the private sector. In the light of the limited resources available, it is not desirable to restrict the development to one sector. Special efforts will be made in the public sector to ensure the establishment of basic and essential industries. Financial and technical assistance is being made available to stimulate development. 
Foreign Trade 
 
International trade occupies an increasingly important role as economic growth and development take place. Associated with the growth is a rising demand for capital goods and raw materials which must be important. Therefore, Nepal will have to earn and spend more foreign exchange, particularly convertible currencies, in the years ahead. 
India is Nepal’s primary and predominant trading partner. Nepal’s exports are prese ntly limited to a few products. In order to diversify trade, agriculture and industry must be developed to produce additional goods for export. In addition, new market for Nepal’s exports must be developed. 
 
Social Justice 
 
Social justice depends upon the allocation of the benefits of economic growth to large numbers of people. If the benefits are secured only by a small group, the active support and cooperation of the people cannot be secured. 
The land reform programme is one major measure designed to improve the economic condition of the people of Nepal. The progressive direct taxes which have been introduced are also designed to distribute benefits more widely. The Mulki Ain, a legal code designed to eliminate individual distinctions based upon caste and religious distinctions, was adopted in the Second Plan and will be supported vigorously in the Third Plan. 
Social justice covers more than an equitable distinction of income and land ownership. Education, health and other social services also help raise the living condition of the people. The manner in which these measures will be stressed will be outlined in later sections. 
To the extent that the panchayat system is effectively utilized, facilities will be made available to the largest number of people. By initiating programmes in regions, the benefits would also be dispersed
geographically. Over-emphasis on equitable income distribution may discourage potential entrepreneurs and restrict the economic growth of the nation. Emphasis must be placed on expanding opportunities for all citizens of Nepal. 
 
Priorities of the Plan 
 
Because of the widespread demands on scarce resources, priorities must be established among the many possible activities. The planning process itself involves as determination of priorities which is affected by existing conditions and the necessity of emphasizing those activities which will most effectively stimulate further development. 
       Agriculture plays a particularly important role in the initial stages of economic development. It provides 
the foods requirements for industrial workers, the raw materials for industry, and earns foreign exchange with which to by needed imports. Moreover, in Nepal, ninety per cent of the people are dependent upon agriculture for their live hood. An agricultural revolution is a necessary condition for rapid growth. To achieve this, not only should modern agricultural techniques be made available but the benefits of increased production should accrue to the cultivator. The Land Reform programme is designed to accomplish the latter goal. But this alone cannot improve the economic condition of the tiller. Production loans, cottage industry development, cooperative credit, marketing societies, and resettlement programmes are also needed. In the light of these considerations, the highest priority has been given to agricultural development. 
Agricultural development depends also on the improvement and expansion of marketing facilities. It will be further stimulated by the establishment of industries which process agricultural products. Prices should be stabilized at an incentive level. To achieve this, modern transport and communication facilities are required. Thus, the priority given to agriculture also affects other areas such as transport and industry. 
Transport development is another critical area for economic growth. Efficient transport facilities are needed to move agricultural products to consumers at low cost. These facilities are also needed to integrate the social and economic activities of the nation. Power is also a basic requirement for the development of Nepal. Therefore, these two sectors have also been given high priority. 
Next in order of priorities is the development of industry. Industrial expansion depends upon the development of transport and power, and the availability of raw materials and other resources. The limited transport and power facilities presently available make immediate industrial growth difficult to achieve. Industrial development, on the other hand, stimulated the expansion of related supporting activities. In the long term, industrialization is essential, and its development should be given maximum stimulus. 
 

CHAPTER III 
Investment Allocation 
 
The Third Plan calls for expenditures of Rs 2,500 million which will increase total gross domestic product by 19 per cent. Plan expenditures by 1969-70 will be some nine per cent of gross domestic product as compared to an estimated six per cent in 1964-65. Total development expenditures are expected to rise from Rs 324 million in the last year of the Second Plan to Rs 600 million by 1969-70.1 
It should be noted that not all expenditures can be classified as investment. Some expenditure will meet recurring costs- e.g. allocations to education, publicly, broadcasting, malaria eradication, health, and various training programmes. A substantial proportion of Plan expenditures, however, will finance construction and the purchase of equipment. 
Some sixty per cent of Plan expenditures will be covered by foreign assistance. A detailed analysis of financial sources in given later, but the proportion of foreign assistance in the Third Plan will be lower than in the Second. 
Nepal’s absorptive capacity has been raising ray. This is seen from the expansion of expenditures over the Second Plan period and the fact that the Second Plan expenditures target has been achieved. The increasing availability of trained manpower, timely procurement and distribution of building materials, and the improvement of administrative efficiency are all important factors contributing to this result. If absorptive capacity rises further as expected, the Plan targets are clearly achievable. 
Public Sector Expenditures 
Out of the Rs 2.500 million to be spent during the Third Plan, the public, panchayat and private sector allocations are Rs 1,740, Rs 240 and Rs 520 million respectively. The public sector allocation includes development target expenditures, commodity assistance and equipment and supplies provided directly by aid - giving nations.2 In the past few years, development expenditures have been rising rapidly. In 1962-63, Rs 70 million were spent out of the development budget. By 1964-65, it rose to RS 235 million. In addition, there are direct expenditures by the aid-giving nations on aided projects. 
Spending capacity must be increased further in view of Nepal’s needs and aspirations. The Third Plan calls for public sector development expenditures of Rs 310 million in the first year rising to Rs 390 million by 1969- 70. In the light of past performances such an increase in absorptive capacity is feasible. 
Panchayat Sector Expenditures 
The mobilization of labour and other resources through the panchayat system is extremely important for social and economic development. As income levels rise over time, the panchayat capacity to mobilize resources will increase. In addition, greater authority will be given to the panchayat organizations in accord with the decentralization programme. Major responsibilities will be given to the zonal, district and gram panchayat. 
The compulsory savings scheme instituted under the land reform programme will be an important source of funds for the panchayats. In addition, as various central government functions are transferred to district and village levels, the panchayats will be given greater taxing powers. This will enable the panchayats to undertake development works of local importance with expanded resources. These will include activities in agriculture, 
 
1Expenditures totaling Rs 324 million in 1964-65 include both public and private expenditures. Direct expenditures by various aid missions for support of t technicians and other measure are excluded. 
2This excludes technical assistance including overseas training. The term “public sector” normally should also include what we have identified as the “ panchayat sector,” but since greater emphasis will be given to development activity conducted by district and local panchayats, this portion of the total has been identified separately. 
irrigation, education, building construction, roads, cottage industries and drinking water. Since the capital, technical skill, and foreign exchange requirements for these are activities relatively limited, they can be effectively handled by the panchayats. 
Private Sector Expenditures 
The Plan calls for Rs 520 million of investment expenditures in the private sector. In the absence of data, it is difficult to estimate the allocation to the several fields of the private sector. Most private investment presently takes place in agriculture, industry and housing. Since the government will be responsible for the major part of investment in other sectors such as transport, health and education, private investment expenditures have been estimated for industry and housing. These come to Rs 50 million for 1964-65. 
Two factors should be noted. First, these expenditures include funds to be mage available to the private sector by the Nepal Industrial Development Corporation, the Cooperative Bank, the Nepal Bank Ltd., and other government-financed credit institutions. Second, because of the lack of data, not all private investment is included. The Plan includes expenditure directly related to the above institutions. These cover industry, agriculture, transport and housing. Cultivators’ investment on a self -help basis is not included. 
Some of the factors affecting industrial development are mentioned in the industrial policy section. Among these are the degrees of tariff protection, tax policy, import licensing, foreign exchange facilities, etc. These factors will be studied and improved as necessary to provide a suitable climate for long term growth and to facilities expansion. 
Allocation of Plan Expenditures 
The allocation of Plan expenditures, based upon the objective and priorities as discussed earlier, and presented in Table 5. The largest proportion of resources goes into development of transport, communication, and power. This takes 37 per cent of total Plan expenditures. Transport and power development is highly capital intensive and requires large amounts of funds. Thus, this sector is allocated more funds than agriculture, which is given top priority. Moreover, the amount of funds allocated to agriculture is not the full measure of expenditures which affect agricultural development. Development of industry, transport and power also benefit and stimulate agricultural expansion. Not all of the private sector investment in agriculture is included in the Plan. Construction and improvement of field channels and drainage facilities, terracing and clearance, undertaken by cultivators, are not included. All of these factors must be kept in mind in assessing the allocation. 
In the private sector, expenditures are allocated to industry, agriculture, transport and housing. Governmental resources have been concentrated more on expanding economic overhead in the form of transport, power and communication which will stimulate agriculture, industry, and transport in the private sector. 
Basis for Sectoral Expenditures 
The amounts allocated to each sector were determined on the basis of projects and activities to be undertaken by each department. These allocations do not necessarily cover the full cost of such activities. In some instances, the projects will extend into the next plan period. In other cases, allocations were made without the technical studies which were needed for detailed cost estimates. This applies more to major projects involving construction than to other types of programmes. Therefore, as more data become available, adjustments will be necessary within the overall Plan total. 
Availability of Resources 
Money is not the only resources required for the implementation of the Third Plan. In addition, trained manpower, construction materials, and other resources are necessary. Resource limitations have been one of the primary obstacles to a more rapid expansion of the capacity of Nepal. In making the sectoral allocations, foreign exchange, construction material, manpower requirement, transport facilities and other relevant factors have been taken into account. Programmes are, to the maximum extent possible based upon present and realistically anticipated availabilities of the required factors. 
Need of Maintenance 
       In view of the present state of limited scarce resources, it is necessary to exploit one of the existing projects to the maximum rather than merely constructing new projects. The nation’s production can be raised without investing any additional capital, if the available roads, bridges, schools, hospital and so forth are utilized fully. So, the present Plan has laid an emphasis upon the maintenance programme in order to have optimum benefit out of them. 
In Table 6, public sector expenditures are allocated among various departmental categories. The sector totals are the same as those given in column one of Table 5. 


CHAPTER IV 
Development Policy 
 
Plan programmes must be based upon plan objectives and the policies to be implemented in the several sectors. Theses policies reflect not only activities to be undertaken by government but also assistance and facilities to be made available to the private sector. This will help clarify the relationship between public and private components of the economy. Another purpose of governmental policy formulation is to eliminate barriers to successful development. The programmes incorporated in the Plan are based upon certain principles and polices. The more important policies concerning agriculture, industry, trade and prices are discussed below: 
Industrial Policy 
Industrialization plays a vital role in accelerating economic development. His Majesty’s Government is committed to supporting further development of the industrial sector. Rather than getting involved in arguments about the relative roles of the private and public sectors. His Majesty’s Government has taken a pragmatic view. In order to promote the industrial development in the private sector, His Majesty’s Government will give special attention to available economic overheads such as transport and power. Government will provide financial and technical assistance to private development. Measures will be taken, however, to ensure that such development will be beneficial to the nation. Where the needs are greater that can be handled by the private sector, public sector units will be established. 
Because public resources are limited, they must be direct to such areas as roads, power and social services. Thus emphasis is placed upon private sector for development. Government will, however, provide necessary assistance. Some of the facilities and concessions presently available are: 
1. 	Income Tax Exemption- New industries are not subject to income tax for ten years after the commencement of business. Thereafter, exemption may be granted wholly or partially as considered desirable. 
2. 	Export Duty Exemption- New and old firms undertaking exports may be gives full or partial import duty exemption for specified periods. 
3. 	Import Duty Exemption- Imports of machinery spare parts, and raw materials may be given full or partial import duty exemption for specified periods. 
4. 	Foreign Exchange - Foreign exchange will be made available to purchase machinery, spare parts and raw materials which are unavailable, or available in inadequate quantities in Nepal and for the remuneration of foreign technicians. 
5. 	Repatriation of Profit- Any person investing foreign capital in industry shall be allowed to repatriate during any single year profits up to ten per cent of the capital investment. 
6. 	Repatriation of Capital - Foreign investors making investments in scarce currency will be allowed to repatriate their investment. During any single year, such investors will be allowed foreign exchange for repatriation up to 25 per cent of their investment. 
7. 	Acquisition of Land and Timber- Assistance will be provided in land acquisition and timber needed for construction will be sold at a 15 per cent discount from the auction rate. 
For industries which are considered essential to Nepal, His Majesty’s Government will consider the provision of additional facilities as required. In addition, loans and technical assistance are available though the Nepal Industrial Development Corporation. 
Trade Policy 
In the modern age, no country can develop without trade relations with other countries. Developing nations must import technical skills and capital equipment. Development has, therefore, been associated historical with an increasing volume of trade. The limited market in a small country like Nepal indicates that industrial development will also depend upon exports. The present relatively low level of trade which Nepal has with other countries is a reflection of its low income level and underdevelopment. Steps will be taken during the Third Plan to expand and diversify trade. 
The main objectives of Nepal’s trade policy will be to increase the volume of exports, the variety of products exported and to diversify markets. 
Nepal’s imports are bound to rise in the years ahead as income levels rise and development activities expand. Recent trade data have yet to be tabulated and published. Therefore, estimates of import -export levels over the Third plan period cannot be formulated. However, it is apparent that export earnings must increase to finance the large volume of imports needed. Production of import substitutes alone will not meet the problem. Special attention will, therefore be given to export expansion. 
Export expansion hinges upon an increas e in the production of export item. Since Nepal’s exports consist mainly of agricultural products, especially food grains, an increase in agricultural production is essential. Just to increase the quantity of exports, however, will not be sufficient. The variety of goods exports must also be increased. Export dependence upon only a few agricultural products makes the nation overly subject to external price fluctuations. 
       Efforts will also be made to diversify the direction of trade. At present Nepal’s trade is almost wholly 
with India and insignificant with other countries. With accelerated development, imports of machinery and construction materials from overseas will increase. To finance these purchases, increased exports outside of India are essential. To encourage this increase provision has been made for the exports to utilize a portion of the earning to import goods into Nepal. In addition, steps will be taken to make Nepalese products more competitive in the world market by reducing costs and ensuring quality standards. 
Imports into Nepal from overseas countries are subject to import licensing. This has been imposed to restrict the import of luxury goods. The available funds are needed to purchase essential development goods. Foreign exchange transaction with overseas countries will continue to be subject to licensing during the Third Plan. Changes will be made in customs tariffs as required to restrict luxury good imports. Policy will be implemented to ensure that export-import activities are primarily for the nations benefited. If necessary, export- import activities will also be undertaken by government. The National Trading Corporation will play an important role in this filed. The recently organized Food Corporation also has a significant role in this connection. 
Agricultural Policy 
The Plan has placed primary emphasis upon the accelerated development of agriculture. In the past, the absence of an overall programme for agriculture has hindered development. In the Third Plan, emphasis is placed upon an integrated agricultural development programme based upon specific objectives rather than piecemeal projects and programmes. 
There are two factors involved in agricultural development. The first in the expansion of agricultural output. The second is the transfer of human and capital resources from agriculture to other sectors. These two components are closely related. The expansion of agricultural output depends upon the adoption of new and improved agricultural techniques. The improvement of techniques will not only stimulate increased production but facilities the transfer of resources to other sectors. At present, the Nepalese economy is heavily based upon agriculture. In the long run, this dependence must be reduced as economic growth is historically associated with population depends on agriculture and 65 per cent of gross domestic products come from this sector, Nepal must depend heavily on this sector for the generation of additional savings. 
       Because of the major differences in topography, soils and climate conditions in Nepal, no single pattern 
of agricultural activity is feasible. In the hills and mountain areas, cultivable land and irrigation facilities are limited by the terrain. Greater emphasis should therefore be placed on animal husbandry and fruit production. Food grains and cash crops are more suitable for the Terai. 
When the tempo of development activities expands and urbanization proceeds rapidly food grain demand will also rise. In the next few years, food grains will still be the primary export. Therefore, major emphasis will be given on the expansion of food grain production, because it can be raised in a short period of time with improved techniques. 
Cultivators must be given every incentive to increase output. Improved seeds, fertilizers and better implements need to be made available at the proper times and places and at reasonable prices. To meet these requirements, an Agricultural Supply Corporation will be established. Cultivators will also need credit to purchase the required inputs. New cooperative societies will be established and existing ones will be strengthened to provide production loans. The Cooperative Bank will make funds available to these societies. Medium and long term loans to individual cultivators will also be made available. An agricultural Bank also will be established to provide loans to individual cultivators at low interest rate. 
The agricultural extension programme will be expanded and further strengthened. The land reform programme designed to protect tenancy rights and to prevent exploitation by landlords, merchants and money lenders will be completed during the Third Plan. 
Prices received by the cultivators will affect their willingness to apply more modern techniques. Steps will be taken to ensure incentive price and to improve marketing efficiency. Landlords who do not cultivate their own lands will be encouraged to put their resources to the industrial sector. 
 
To reduce the pressure of population on land in the hill regions, some of the present population will be resettled in the Terai and Inner Terai. Efforts will be made to encourage the movement of labour from agriculture to the construction and industrial sectors. 
Price Policy 
Over the past few years, consumer goods prices have been rising. The experience of other developing nations indicates that prices tend to rise in the process of development. However, a rapid rate of increase will adversely affect development effort by hitting fixed income groups and stimulating speculative rather that productive use of saving. And, it will be more difficult to achieve the Plan targets due to the rise in the costs. Every effort will therefore, be made to maintain a stable price level, particularly for construction materials and daily necessities. 
The following are a list of factors responsible for rising in Nepal: 
1. 	Due to rising development expenditures, Government expenditures during the Second Plan have more than doubled. In a low income country like Nepal, a large par of any increase in income is spent on the purchase of food and other essential consumer goods. This tends to push the prices of these goods upward. Prices are also under pressure due to increasing population. 
2. 	Because of the open border with India, Indian prices, particularly of food grains, affect prices in Nepal. Indian food prices have been rising rapidly over the past few years. In addition, since most consumer goods are imported from India, inflationary pressures in India affect the prices of these goods in Nepal. 
3. 	Because of underdeveloped transport, isolated areas may suffer shortages and price increase although the nation as s whole has a surplus. 
4. 	The rapid expansion of money supply in Nepal is another factor. An increase in money supply is necessary to accommodate increased output and the monetization of the economy but the present rate of expansion is in excess of the rate required for the above purposes. Money supply has almost doubted over the Three Year Plan period. 
To s tabilize prices within the plan period the following measures will be taken: 
 
1. The Food Corporation’s activities will be expanded. Food grains will be purchased in surplus areas and transferred to deficit zones. Storage facilities will be expanded in different areas. 2. Efforts will be made to produce more consumer goods within Nepal and where necessary, to import them on an orderly basis. 3. Money supply expansion will be curtailed. Instead of increasing foreign exchange reserve with the associated expansion of money supply, efforts will be made to use more of the foreign exchange receipts to purchase essential imports and thus provide greater benefits to the nation. 4. Since increased production will help to stabilize the price level, a balance will be maintained between projects which are directly and indirectly productive. 5. Prices of essential commodities will, if necessary, be directly controlled. Regional Development Policy 
Accelerated economic development requires the implementation of proper policies and institutional improvements on a national scale. Geographic concentration of Plan activities will not necessarily be conductive to overall national development. Development should take into account regionally available resources and productive factors. 
The natural and human resources available in the several regions of Nepal vary both in variety and quantity. Even those natural resources which have been located and identified differ in accessibility and case of development. Other cooperating factors are also required. For example transport, communication, power and trained personnel are required for the development of available natural resources. These essential facilities cannot be provided throughout Nepal in the present situation. Because of these limitations, priority will be given to particular regions. 
The availability of natural resources, transport facilities, topography and related factors will determine the regions which priority. Physically nation can bi divided in two ways. 
1. 	The first is in terms of major river systems. This is important because of the potential availability of power and the road network which will usually follow river valleys. On this basis, Nepal can be divided into three regions: the Karnali, the Koshi, and the Gandak-Bagmati river basins. At present, development activities are centered in the Gandk-Bagmati region. However, there are a number of development activities underway in theKoshi region. The Karnli region is in the preliminary stage of development. 
2. 	The second basis of regional differentiation is topography, and on this basis the country can be divided 
into three regions— the Terai, the Hills, and the Himalyan belt. Most of the development activity is concentrated in the Terai and a small part of the hill area. This reflects the relative development of the economic overhead facilities in the several areas. In the agricultural sector, food grains and cash crops will be emphasized in the Terai, horticulture in the hills, and anima l husbandry in the northernmost region. Industrial development in the hills is possible but will occur slowly because of transport and power limitations. 
It is desirable to divide the nation into regions to provide a basis for regional planning. Regional planning must be based upon resources availability and developmental potential. However, there is still a considerable gap in the knowledge about the existence of mineral resources, their quality, and their volume in these regions. Emphasis will be placed on survey activities to locate and explore available resources. Since, the Himalayan and the far western regions have been most neglected; special attention will be given to their development. 
Health, education, cottage industries and agricultural extension services, to mention a few, are activities with a national scope and will be expanded in all regions. The Panchayat system has encouraged the undertaking of local improvement works thought the nation. These have helped to maintain and stimulate regionally balanced development. The decentralization programme will give further encouragement to local initiative and interest for local and regional development. 
 

CHAPTER V 
Financing the Plan 
 
Since 1956, when His Majesty’s Government introduced the First Plan, the absorptive capacity of the economy has been increasing. The financial and physical resources required for development have expanded correspondingly. In the past, the absorptive capacity was less than the amount of financial resources available. During the past few years however, spending capacity has increased to such an extent that the availability of financial resources has become a limiting factor. 
The rate of investment in Nepal is very low. During the Third Plan it is expected to rise nine per cent of gross domestic product. This is still low compared to other developing nations, but in the light of past experience, it appears reasonable. Even so, greater effort in both the public and private sectors will be required to achieve such a goal. 
A Review of the Second Plan 
       During the Second Plan, some Rs 600 million was estimated to have been spent in the public sector. Of this amount, it was planned that Rs 100 million would be financed internally (Rs 50 million from domestic revenues, Rs 10 million from internal loans and Rs 40 million, was to be financing). The remainder, Rs 500 million, was to be financed through foreign aid. 
As a result of vigorous means to limit regular budget expenditures and to increase tax receipts, budgetary savings were larger that original planned. Despite the pressure of increased prices and annual salary increments, regular expenditures were held to Rs 124.3 million in the first years Rs 114.3 million in the second and Rs 127.0 million in the final year. During this period, governmental tax and other receipts rose from Rs 129.0 million to Rs 188.5 million or almost 50 per cent. Total budgetary saving amounted to Rs 107.1 million over the period. In addition, Rs 20.6 million was secured from internal bond issues. Total internal financing including expenditure outlay cash balances amounted to Rs 133.40 million. Since the balance was provided by foreign assistance totaling Rs 470 million, the need for deficit originally planned was eliminated. Table 7 gives the sources of development budget expenditures in further detail. Table 8 gives the direct expenditure of the various aid agencies for development purposes. These do not go through H. M. G. development budget. 
Preferably, all development expenditure should be reflected in the annual budget. Steps are being taken to do this — e.g. not that in the third column to Table 8, direct expenditures by India are not shown because these are now channeled through His Majesty’s Government. 
In the past, there has been a considerable gap between actual expenditures and budgeted amounts. This difference has, however, been decreasing. In 1963-64, for example, actual expenditures were 70 per cent of the budget. In the following year, the proportion rose to 80 per cent. Over the next five years, this gap is expected to be further reduced. 
Financial Resources for the Third Plan 
       As presented in Chapter III, Rs 2,500 million will be spent in the public, panchayat, and private sectors 
during the Third Plan period. Public sector expenditures are programmed are Rs 1,740 million. In addition, His Majesty’s Government will provide Rs 210 million to the private and panchayat sectors in the form of loans and subsidies. Thus, total central governmental requirements are Rs 1,950 million from internal and external sources. The remainder of the Rs 2,500 million must be generated by private investors and by district and village panchayats through taxation. 
Financing of the Public Sector 
Internal Resources 
In the early years of planed development in Nepal, His Majesty’s Government was unable to meet more than a small share of development expenditures and depended heavily on foreign assistance. In the 1951-61 
 
 
 
2	This includes the carry over form balance of 1961-62. 
3	Rs. 18 million external loans provided to NIDC is also included. 
periods, regular budget deficits totaled Rs 160 million.4 These were met out of accumulated governmental cash balances. Over the First Plan 1965-61, the regular budget ran an Rs 62.2 million deficit. Cash balances were used to meet the deficit and also to provide funds for the development budget. During the Second Plan, with increasing recognition that Nepal should not depend wholly on foreign assistance for development financing, emphasis was placed on generating more internal resources. Priority was given to those projects which promised a direct return to governmental revenues. 
As a result of these measures, government revenues rose rapidly. During the Third Plan such efforts will be continued. By 1969-70, it is estimated that governmental receipts will rise be Rs 88.5 million to Rs 340 million. Regular budget expenditures are expected to raise from Rs 127.0 million to216.2 million over the same period. Table 10 shows the expected sources of governmental revenue over Plan period. 
Sources of Internal resources 
From the additional taxes levied in 1964-65, there will be an increase of total tax receipts from Rs 188.5 million to Rs 224.2 million. Regular expenditures are expected to increase from Rs 127.0 million to Rs 216.2 million. Out of the present taxes, over the Plan period, there will be a saving of Rs 177.7 millions. 
During the Plan period as a result of governmental efforts, customs receipts will increase. Similarly revenue from excise and income taxes will rise as a result of administrative reforms in the tax machinery and rising incomes. Other tax receipts are also expected to rise. In addition government enterprise earnings will rise as management improves. 
Keeping the present tax rates, by 1969-70 total revenue will rise to Rs 224.2 million. This will amount to four percent of gross domestic product. In the United States and the United Kingdom, governmental receipts amount to some 23 per cent of national income. In underdeveloped countries like Nepal, government collected 10 to 12 per cent of national income. Therefore, there is scope for further increase in revenue by His Majesty’s Government. By introducing new taxes and increasing existing rates an additional Rs 322.3 million will be collected over the Plan period. 
Although, 65 percent of gross domestic product comes from the agricultural sector, less than 25 per cent of government income comes from taxation of agriculture. Imposition of a greater tax load on agriculture is not, therefore, unreasonable. There is considerable scope for increasing taxes in the agricultural sector to finance 
 
4Regular budget expenditures are distinguished from development budget expenditures in that the regular encompassed established government activities, whereas the development budget is concerned with the outlay for new or development projects and activities 
development expenditures. During the Plan period, therefore, taxes in this sector such as the land tax will have to be increased. 
In order to increase government income, rates of the custom duty will be studies and changed as necessary. Social attention will be paid to basic consumer and development goods. Increased tax rates and receipts will occur in this sector. Encouragement will be given both in the public and private sectors to produce goods not presently produced in Nepal. Theses new goods will be taxed as necessary to increase governmental receipts. 
Nepal’s rates of income taxes are lower than those of many underdeveloped countries. The maximum rate is 40 per cent of income. These rates need to be increased to raise more revenues. 
       In order to reduce income differentials in Nepal, direct taxes should be levied. Since income levels are 
very low. The number of taxpayers will be quite small. Through these taxes alone, therefore, the development programmes cannot be fully financed. Indirect taxes will still continue to be an important source of income in the years ahead. 
 
Sales taxes will be levied during the Plan period. In other countries, low sales taxes are an important source of governmental receipts. In addition, financial conditions and financial administration in Nepal will be studies and additional indirect taxes levied. 
Internal Loans 
       The system of raising internal loans for the country’s economic development started only two years ago. 
Two years, experience has been quite encouraging. Funds totaling Rs 13.1 million were generated in the second year of the Three Year Plan through the issue of government development bonds. In the final year, 1964-65, Rs 7.5 million were raised by the same procedure. Over the Third Plan Period, Rs 10 million will be raised annually, making a total of Rs 50 million to be spent on development projects. 
Although a deficit of Rs 100 million is projected in Table 8 above, it is anticipated that deficit financing will not be the method followed in making up this gap. Additional taxes will be generated, domestic borrowing through sale of bonds increased, and additional foreign assistance obtained. 
Foreign Assistance 
Although domestic revenue available for development purposes has increased considerably, it is still inadequate to cover the entire development budget for the Third Plan. Therefore, foreign assistance wills con6tinie to be necessary for number of years. During the Third Plan, Rs 1,250 million will be needed from this source to finance planned expenditures. On the basis of current negotiations, participation by various countries and agencies will be as follows: 
India: The major projects started during the Second Plan will be completed in the Third Plan period, the estimated cost to run them being 200 million. Of the various projects started undertaken to date by India, the most significant are the Trishuli Hudel, the Chatra Canal, and the Sunauli-Pokhara road. The Indian Government has also agreed to undertake construction of a portion of the East-West Highway.5 Additional assistance is expected to be spent on smaller continuing projects and new activities to be taken during the Plan period. 
United States : Assistance from the United States each year is expected to remain at roughly the same level during the Third Plan as in the Second Grant assistance is expected to total Rs 310 million. Another, Rs 70 million will be received from general commodity assistance and in the form of machinery and equipment for the East-West Highway, giving a total of Rs 380 million for various development projects. In addition, Rs 90 million 
 
5The total expenditures to complete these projects are es timated at Rs 480 million. Actual assistance received during the Plan period will be somewhat\hat smaller since some of the projects will be carried over to the Fourth Plan. 
will be provided for technical assistance and training facilities. These latter costs are not included in Plan expenditures and therefore are in addition to the Rs 1,250 million of foreign assistance expected. 
U. S. S. R.: During the Third Plan the Simra-Janakpur highway and an agricultural implement factory will be constructed with Soviet assistance. 
People’s Republic of Chins: The Kathmandu-Kodari road and the brick and tile factory will be completed during the Plan period. Third Plan expenditures on those two projects are estimated at Rs 60 million. Additional projects will also be started with Chinese assistance.6 
Other Assistance: Additional assistance will also be received from Germany, the United Kingdom, The United Nations, and Australia. Switzerland, New Zealand and the Ford Foundation. Economic and technical assistance for transport development is expected from the International Development Association. 
Technical Assistance 
In addition to financial assistance, technical and advisory personnel have been provided by friendly nations and international agencies. Their cost to the assisting nation amounts to Ts 10 million annually. Because of the storage of technicians and professionally trained manpower in Nepal, there will be a continuing need for foreign technical assistance during the Third Plan. 
The cost of these technicians has not been included in the Plan total. Cost data is difficult to obtain and the benefits from technicians’ services are equally difficult to measure in monetary terms. Nepal will continue to send its young men and women abroad for specialized training because of the limited facilities available within the country. As the cost of training varies widely from country, this also has not been included in the Plan. 
Panchayat Sector 
It is estimated that Rs 340 million will be collected under the compulsory saving component of the land reform programme over the Third Plan. Out of this, Rs 180 million will be used to provide credit to the tillers. The balance of Rs 160 million will be net saving. Local panachayat resources are estimated at Rs 40 million over the Plan period. Therefore, Rs 200 million will be made available from the panchayat sector. 
Private Sector 
Over the third plan Rs 520 million will be invested by the private sector of this total Rs 350 million will be secured from private savings. The balance will consist of loans from the Nepal Industrial Development Corporation, the Cooperative Bank, and other governmentally supported financial institution. 
Monetary Policy 
The establishment of the central bank, the Nepal Rastra Bank, in 1965, filled a major gap in the monetary system. In its initial years, the Bank did little more than act as banker to the government. During that period, Indian currency circulated freely throughout the country. The exchange rate between Indian and Nepalese currencies, however, fluctuated considerably. Beginning in 1960, however, the Nepal Rastra Bank stabilized the exchange rate, fixing it at Rs 100 IC, and was put to an end the years, unstable exchange rate of Indian and Nepalese currency. 
Various measures were taken during the Second Plan period to convert to a single currency system. As a consequence, the use of Nepali currency is expanding, while the circulation of Indian currency is declining. By the end of the Third Plan, it is expected that Indian currency will no longer be used for commercial transaction in Nepal. 
 
 
6The total Chinese assistance on these projects is Ts 250 million. Since some of the larger projects will not be completed during the Plan period, actual expenditures will be somewhat smaller. 
       The quantity of Nepalese currency in circulation increased rapidly during the Second Plan period. In 
July, 1962, the money supply amounted tom Rs 227.8 million. By July 1965, it had increased to an estimated Rs 400 million. Over the three year period, the money supply rose by 95 percent, a rapid rate of increase. 
One of the reasons for the expansion of the expansion of the money supply is the replacement of Indian currency. The actual increase in money supply cannot be determined since there is no data on the amount of Indian currency withdrawn over the Plan period. 
       It appears, however, that the total money supply expanded considerably with attendant pressures on 
prices. During the Third Plan period, a detailed study will be made of the rate of increasing of the money supply needed to meet trade and commerce requirements. The Governments will then limit the expansion of Indian currency balances. With the establishment of her own currency system, Nepal is now in a position to influence the price t hrough monetary policies. 
Foreign Exchange 
Since November, 1960, all convertible currency transactions have been handled through the Nepal Rastra Bank. In July, 1960 the Bank held Rs 55.75 million of convertible currencies and gold. By January, 1965, convertible reserves had risen to Rs 192.71 million, an increase of 248 per cent. Similarly, inconvertible foreign exchange during this period rose from Rs 82.1 million to Rs 204.7 million. 
       The Second Plan estimated currency requirements to be provided by Nepal for plan expenditures at Rs 
65 million. Actually HMG spent Rs 50 million from its own resources. During the Second Plan period Nepal’s convertible foreign exchange receipts from exchange were Rs 175.8 million and expenditures were Rs 116 million. Therefore, there has been an increase of Rs 59.8 million convertible balances, as shown in Table 11. 
Total foreign currency receipts over the Second Plan period cannot be estimated because of the absence of data. Some parts of Nepal still use Indian currency to transact business across the border. This practice has complicated the analysis of foreign exchange receipts. The balance of Indian currencies held in the Central bank has also increase considerably. To hold foreign balances in excess of normal requirements is undesirable from the economic point of view. Therefore during the Third Plan, foreign exchange will be utilized for maximum benefit to the economy. 
According to Table 12, total foreign exchange receipts will amount to Rs 296.4 million. Rs 89.2 million will be spent on imports of goods and services associated with regular budget expenditures, Rs 220.0 million in those associated with development budget expenditures. The estimated total the plan period. Efforts will be made to eliminate this shortfall by reducing expenditures and increasing receipts, particularly through export promotion. Any remaining overall deficit is only three per cent of present reserve holdings. 
The cost of construction materials, equipment and other imports to be financed by aid-giving countries has not been included in Table 12. The amount of such assistance will depend on the projects to be undertaken by the several nations. Even for projects already committed the data necessary to estimate import costs are not available. 
Financial Institutions 
In order to mobilize internal and external resources most effectively, it is necessary to strengthen the financial institutions in Nepal. The commercial bank and other institutions have provided short term loans at relatively low interest rates for commerce, trades and industry. Long term loans are also needed for industrial and agricultural development. Financial institutions to meet these requirements are essential for economic growth. His Majesty’s Government has taken various steps to collect available savings including the establishment of specialized financial institutions. During the next five years, the existing institutions will be strengthened and new units established as required. 
Nepal Industrial Development Corporation (NIDC) 
NIDC was established as a government corporation in 1954 to provide financial and technical assistance to the private sector. During 1960-61 loans and equity participation of Rs 411 thousand were made available to private companies. Over the Second Plan period, another more than Rs 30 million was made available. During the Third Plan, the activities of the Corporation will be expanded still further. 
Cooperative Bank 
The Cooperative Bank was established during the Second Plan to provide loans funds to cooperative societies and individual farmers for agricultural development. His Majesty’s Government has provided Ts 2.7 million in share capital and loans to the bank. During the Second Plan, the bank made loans totaling approximately Rs 1.6 million. The organization of the bank will be strengthened and it is operations greatly expanded. 
National Commercial Bank 
The Nepal Bank, established in 1938, is at present the only commercial bank in Nepal. As this bank alone cannot meet the financial requirements of commerce, trade and industry, a new bank, the Nepal Commercial Bank has been established in the public sector. This institution will begin operations during the Third Plan. It will develop banking facilities in areas which are presently not served by a commercial bank and operate as an agent of the Nepal Rastra Bank. This will relieve the Rastra Bank of some of its present functions and enable it to concentrate its efforts upon improving the monetary system of the country. 
Agricultural Bank 
At present, there is not institution beside the Cooperative Bank to provide medium and long term loans to cultivators for agricultural development. Since the existing bank cannot effectively provide loan facilities both the cooperative societies and individual farmers, a separate bank will be established during the Third Plan. 
Insurance Companies 
Insurance enterprises have been as important source of savings in developed and developing countries. Nepal as yet has not been able to establish its own insurance companies. These functions are presently handled by foreign firms. Premium collections are estimated at Rs 8 million annually. In order to keep these funds within the country, insurance activities will be initiated during the coming plan period. 
Stock Exchange 
Stock exchanges play an important role in the development of financial institutions and the channeling of savings into investment opportunities. Plans are therefore being made to establish a stock exchange in Nepal. 
 

CHAPTER VI 
Population and Manpower 
 
Manpower is the most important resource of any nation. The future of a country which has a literate, healthy and hard working population is bright regardless of the availability of other resources. One measure of development is the level of production. This is affected not only by the numbers but also the quality of the labour force. Labour quality is dependent upon literacy, physical and intellectual development, and technical knowledge and the adaptability of the workers to new environments. Population growth also vitally affects economic development. A rapid rate of growth tends to hold back development. It is, therefore, necessary to analyze the existing population and its anticipated growth as a part of the planning process. 
Population 
The first national population census was taken in 1911-12. It counted 5,638.749 persons in Nepal. Population censes have been taken every ten years since then. The first census bases on international standards were conducted in 1952-54. The difficult nature of the terrain, the poor transport facilities and the shortage of trained manpower made it necessary to spread the field activities over tow years, thus casting some doubt upon the reliability of the figures. The latest census, 1961-62, was completed within a shorter period and more modern techniques were applied. The results are, therefore, presumed to be more accurate. 
Population Increase 
From 1910-11 to 1961-62, population increased by 3,841,650 or 68.12 per cent. This is an average annual increase of 1.4 per cent. As a result of health services expansion, life expectancy is rising and the rate of population increase has undoubtedly also risen. Between the censuses of 1954 and 1961, the rate of increase averaged 1.6 per cent annually. The rate has undoubtedly risen further and is probably about 2.0 per cent at present. A sample survey of births and deaths in 1964 tends to confirm the 2.0 per cent rate. 
An analytical study of the latest census data indicates that the infant mortality rate is 244 per 1,000 births; the birth rate 41.1; and the death rate, 20.8. Life expectancy at birth is estimated at 32.01 years. 
The death rate is expected to decline further as medical facilities expand. The birth rate is not expected to decline significantly unless fairly planning programmes are effectively implemented. Thus, the rate of increase is most likely to rise in the years ahead. An estimate of future population is given in Table 13. The estimates are based upon the 1961-62 census data plus result of sample surveys and other studies. The rate of increase during the Third Plan is estimated at two percent annum, during 1970-75 at 2.2 per cent and over 1975-80 at 2.4 per cent. 
Age Distribution 
The increase from 1065 to 1980 is estimated at 3,974,298. The 0-14 age group now contain 40 per cent of the total population, the 15-59 age groups 54.8 per cent, and the 60 and over group 5.2 per cent. The portion in the non-productive age groups is relatively high: 45.2 per cent of the population falls in the dependent-age 
categories. This percentage is likely to rise in the future. Unemployment in the 15-59 age group may raise and female participation in the labour force in likely to rise as development occurs. 
A reduction of the birth rate usually occurs only over a period of years. The death rate is likely to fall more rapidly. By 1980, life expectancy at birth is expected to rise to 42 years and infant mortality to decline to 180 per 1,000. 
If the population increases as estimated, the demands for health, education, resettlement, and employment will become even more difficult to satisfy. The primary education age group, 6-10, will increase by 50 percent. These will be an increase of 2,200,000 in the 15-59 age groups. The population pressure on land will further increase and more resourc es must be directed toward creating new employment opportunities. Simply to maintain present per capita income, production must increase. Scarce resources will be absorbed in maintaining income levels rather than increasing them. This emphasized the necessity of undertaken an effective and widespread family planning programme. 
Increasing population means greater population density. At present there is an average of 175 persons per square mile. Because of the topography, cultivable lands in limited and density per cultivable area is mush higher. 
As shown in Table 14, population density in the Terai per unit of cultivated area is less than in the hills. This indicated the desirability of shifting some of the hill population to the Terai. Unless the transfer is made, per capita production in the hill areas is likely to decline with further population increase. 
Labour Force 
The labour force in Nepal is defined as the group above the age of 15: at present the total is estimated to be 4,307,222 as shown in Table 15. Table 15 shows labour force data. 
per cent in industry, 1.5 per cent in service, less than 1.0 per cent in commerce and 1.7 per cent in other occupations. A large proportion of the labour force in non-agricultural activities is found in Kathmandu. In the Terai and in the hills, the agricultural proportion is correspondingly high. 
       A comparative study of the censuses of 1952-54 and 1961-62, shows that 50 per cent of the population 
was counted as in the labour force in the earlier period with equal male and female participation. By 1961-62 only 43.8 per cent was included. The reason for the decrease is due to the expansion of educational facilities. The proportion of the population considered literate in 1952-54 was 4.4 per cent. Of this group, 60 per cent had attended or were attending Primary School, 26 per cent Secondary School and 13 per cent College. By 1961-62, 8.9 per cent of the populations were in the literate category. Of these, the Primary School portion had risen to 72 per cent, the Secondary School portion to 18 per cent, 7 per cent in the intermediate degree category and 3 per cent in the higher levels of college training. 
       Assuming that the labour force increases at the same rate as the population, and in the same proportion 
for agriculture and other sectors the pressure on agricultural occupations will increase. Therefore, employment opportunities outside of agriculture muse expand, not only to stimulate economic growth but also to maintain existing income levels. One of the primary objectives of the Third Plan, therefore, is to transfer labour from agriculture to other sectors. 
Technical Manpower 
Technically trained manpower is required to implement the development programmes. One of the main difficulties in carrying through development projects in the past few years has been the storage of trained technicians. In order to overcome this storage, various training facilities were set up during the First and Second Plan periods. In addition, men and women were sent abroad for training. Although these steps have helped overcome the problem, the shortage is still not fully met. More trained manpower will be required as the pace of development activity expands. The following factors must be considered. 
1. 	The time required to train technicians and professional people. At least five to six years are required to train doctors, engineers and high level technicians. Two to three years are needed for overseers, nurses and agricultural assistants. Therefore, the training programmes and the numbers to be rained should be determined in terms of a long term development perspective. For example, those sent for end of the Plan. 
2. 	Experience shows that the ratio of middle level technicians to professional manpower need is at least 3 or 4 to one. The ratio of skilled workers such as brick layers and carpenters to middle grade technicians is about four or five to one. The experience of other nations shows that middle level technicians will be in short supply, but in Nepal even low level technicians are in short supply. In some instances, the aid - giving nations will provide technicians to meet these shortages. 
Training Policy 
Governmental policy is to provide training facilities within the country for all except a few specialists. During the Second Plan, Training facilities were provided within Nepal for middle level technicians. In the Third Plan, higher level and professional training will be started. These will consist of an agricultural college, an engineering college and a medical school. Because of the time necessary to establish these institutions, their output will not enter the market until the last years of the Third Plan or in the Fourth Plan. Therefore, outside training facilities for high level technicians will be expanded. At present, there are virtually no training facilities for skilled workers and low level technicians expect in the agriculture and forestry areas. Training of skilled labour must be provided to meet the expanding requirements. 
Training Facilities 
Under the foreign scholarship programme students will continue to be sent abroad for training. In the past three years, the numbers who have been sent abroad is 996. The number 543 is highest in technical fields such as engineering, health, and agriculture. Of the total, 51 per cent or 517 were sent to India, 142 to the United 
States, 76 to the USSR, 66 to the UK, and 24 to China. Students have also been sent to Pakistan, Germany, Israel, Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, Poland, Ceylon and Japan. Within Nepal, an additional 470 were trained in agriculture, 181 in forestry, 130 in engineering, 245 in health, 1,087 in primary education, 1,386 in cottage industries, 1,745 in panchayats and 205 in the cooperative sector. (Detailed data are given in the respective appe nds tables). 
Trained-Manpower Requirements 
Table 16 gives an estimate of the additional trained manpower required during the Third Plan, estimated availability and the anticipated gap. 
Expansion of Training Facilities 
In order to meet the expanding requirements for trained manpower, existing training facilities will be expanded and new units started. As noted above, an engineering college, a medical school, and an agricultural college will be established. Even with these new facilities available, trained manpower will be inadequate to meet demands. Trained personnel from outside will, therefore, continue to be utilized. 
There are fourteen training centers for middle -grade technicians. In addition, more limited training programmes are conducted by several government departments. It is evident that additional facilities are required. There has been a rapid expansion in the demand for engineers, particularly mechanical engineers. There is a pressing need for technicians 
and skilled labour in the construction sector. The one unit in this area has very limited capacity; because it must be expanded and additional facilities established. A polytechnic institute will help meet these requirements by providing training in a variety of area. The present engineering school will therefore be expanded into a polytechnic institute. Other facilities will be established for low level technicians. 
Efforts will be made to utilize more effectively the services of the retired soldiers who have received technical training abroad. It is estimated that some 300 soldiers with such training retire annually. The largest skill- group consists of machines. 
Technical Assi stance 
The technical assistance which Nepal receives from aid -giving agencies is very important because of the limited number of persons with the essential training and experience available in Nepal. Such assistance, moreover, will stimulate the development of local skills and talents. Every effort will be made Nepali Personnel. 
 

PART II 
DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMMES 
 
CHAPTER VII 
Agricultural Development 
 
In addition to the heavy concentration of the labour force in agriculture, the economy as a whole is dominated by this sector: in 1964-65, 65 per cent of the gross domestic product is estimated to have been derived from this sector and eighty-five per cent of current exports consist of agricultural products. 
Since, Nepal is an agricultural country with a low yield level of output in comparison with other countries, national output is also very low. The world average yields of paddy, maize and wheat are 2,030, 2,080 and 1179 kilograms per hectare; whereas the yields in Nepal are only 1,819, 1,898 and 1,112 kilograms per hectare. In Japan the average yield per hectare of these food grains is 4,700, 2,700 and2.740 kilograms. It is evident that a substantial increase in agricultural output can be achieved through improved techniques. The expenditures required for improving techniques will be less than those required in other areas. Since output can be increased at relatively low cost it is imperative, to meet the target of doubling national income within fifteen years, that major stress be given the development agriculture. 
Present Condition 
In the First and Second Plan periods, special attention was given the establishment of experimental farms and livestock centres and the training of middle-grade technicians. At present there are eleven agronomy farms, four crop protection centres, an agricultural implement research and production unit, 16 horticulture centres, four livestock breeding units, two sheep breeding centres, three pig farms two poultry farms, one hatchery, one research station, 33 veterinary hospitals and dispensaries, three cheese centres, one central dairy, seven fishery units, a resettlement centre and a tractor station. 
During the Second Plan period 680 middle-grade technicians were trained. One or more middle-grade technician was sent to 53 of the 75 development districts to participate in the extension programme. 
Problems of Agricultural Development 
       There are two major problem facing agriculture in Nepal. First, as noted, pres ent agricultural output is 
low and will have to be inc4reased through a variety of activities. Second, the incentive to increase output is lacking in the existing agricultural system. The land reform programme has been started with the purpose of providing the necessary incentives. This will be discussed later. The essential factors for increasing production are improved seeds, fertilizer, irrigation, crop protection, and improved implements. Unless these factors are effectively combined, agricultural production will not rise. As most of the culti9vators in Nepal are illiterate, they are hesitant to change from their traditional system of cultivation to modern techniques. 
The seeds used by cultivators are of low quality and subject to insect damage. As a result, yields are low. Thus if improved seeds were uses, a ten per cent increase in production could be achieved. 
The yield of land declines after continuous cultivation without use of fertilizers. Fertilizers should be applied to maintain and increase crop production. One of the reasons for low yields is the very limited use of fertilizers. Research has shown that the use of one ton of chemical fertilizer will increase food grain production by some ten tons. When the cost of fertilizer and the value of the additional output are taken into account, one rupee spent on fertilizers will bring a return of four rupees. 
There are only limited irrigation facilities in Nepal. Where such facilities are available, they have not been properly utilized. In many districts in the Terai, production could be doubled by spending Rs 17 per acre on irrigation. 
Although a part of food crops is destroyed by insects cultivators have not given sufficient attention to crop protection. As a result some 15 per cent of the total output is lost through damage. 
A substantial increase of output can also be achieved by the use of improved agricultural implements. Use of improved ploughs and other implements has taken place on a very limited scale. 
Because the above measures have not been utilized by the tillers, there has been little increase in agricultural output. Total cultivated area is 1,831,000 hectares. Not more than 50,000 kilograms of improved seed were used on, not more than 1,000 hectares annually during the Second Plan period. Annual utilization of chemical fertilizer is only 2,000 metric tons; some 71,000 hectares are under irrigation, which is only four per cent of total cultivated land. Similarly, little use of improved implements been made. 
Objectives and Targets 
Agricultural output must be increased to meet the food requirements of the growing population, to priority raw materials for expanding industries and to earn foreign exchange through larger exports. The production of meat, eggs, fruits etc. will also have to be increased to fulfill nutritional requirements more adequately. 
In the light of increasing requirements within Nepal and the need for increasing exports, priority has been given to agricultural development. Sixty per cent of the income from exports is derived from exports of food grains alone. 
In the light of the above objectives, the Plan target is to increase food grain production by 15 per cent and cash-crop output by 73 per cent. The production target of various food grains and cash crops is given in Table 17. 
 
Additional production of fish, poultry and animal products, fruit, and vegetables is to be achieved by distributing the basic stocks required e.g. seed, chicks, fingerlings, etc. In Table 18 the targets to be achieved are set forth. 
Components of the agricultural programme which will contribute materially to increase output are set forth in quantitative terms in Table 19. Several of these 
Programme for Various Food Grains 
Paddy 
Paddy is the main crop of Nepal and is cultivated on some 1,100,000 hectares. Since there is little possibility of expanding paddy cultivation into new areas, the target of an increase of 7.5 per cent will be achieved by using improved techniques on 350,000 hectares. On 200,000 hectares of this total, 22 per cent of the increase in production will stem from increased use of chemical fertilizer and 78 per cent from the use of natural fertilizer, improved seed and irrigation water. Improved seeds will be used on 73 thousand hectares, especially in the hill regions. Thirty per cent of the total fertilizer use target will be for paddy. 
Maize 
In the hill regions of Nepal, maize is the main food item of the people. Maize is cultivated on some 460,000 hectares. Cultivation can be expanded by another 245,000 hectares. Out of 245, hectares, 28.5 thousand will be brought under maize during the Plan period. Manure and other fertilizers will be used on 50 thousand hectares, and hybrid seed will be sown on 28.5 thousand hectares. This program will be emphasized in the Hills and in parts of the Inner Terai. 
Wheat 
Winter crop production in Nepal is very limited largely because of the limited availability of water. Wheat is cultivated in some 125.000 hectares; although the total cultivable area on which wheat could be grows is 1.4 
million hectares. During the Plan period wheat will be grown on 200,000 hectares and an additional 270,000 metric tons will be produced. Emphasis will be given the use of improved seeds and chemical fertilizers. A ‘Grow More Wheat’ campaign will be carried out throughout Nepal. 
Programme for Cash Crops 
Sugarcane 
To meet the sugarcane requirements of the existing sugar factories and of those to be opened in the future, sugarcane output will be doubled. At presents cane is cultivated on only 9 thousand hectares. Sugarcane can be cultivated on some 32 thousand hectares in Nepal. During the Third Plan period cane will be grown on an additional 5.7 thousand hectares in the districts of Bara, Parsa, Rupandehi, Kapilvastu, Banke, Morang and Sarlahi. Improved seeds will be used in the new areas as well as on the presently cultivated lands of Morang, Rupandehi, Kapilvastu, Bara and Parsa districts. Emphasis will be placed upon the proper use of fertilizers. 
Jute 
Jute is one of our main export crops; in trade beyond India, it is most important. Present, jute is cultivated in Saptari, Morang, and Jhapa districts on 32 thousand hectares. During the coming five years, an additional ten thousand hectares will be sown with jute and annual output by 1969-70 will be 54 thousand metric tons. To increase output improved techniques, improved seeds and chemical fertilizers will be used. 
Tobacco 
To meet the raw material requirements of the existing cigarette factories and export demands, tobacco cultivation will be expanded to cover an additional 15.5 thousand hectares over the present eight thousand hectares. The new areas of cultivation will be in the districts of Sarlahi, Saptari, Mohottari, and in parts of the Inner Terai. By the end of the Plan period annual production will reach an estimated 14 thousand metric tons. Improved techniques and improved seeds will be used in cultivation, particularly those seeds recommended by the cigarette factory such as Virginia Gold, Del Crest and Australist. 
Oil-seeds 
Oil-seeds, particularly mustard, are cultivated on 108,000 hectares. Annual production is estimated to be about 51,500 metric tons. To achieve the 18 per cent increase targeted for the Plan period, improved seeds and fertilizers will be applied to 50,000 hectares. Mustard will be planted on additional 7.5 thousand hectares in the districts of Chitawan, Nawalparasi, Dang Deokhuri, Bardia, Kanchanpur and Banke. Thus, an additional nine thousand metric tons of oil-seed will be produced annually. 
Provision of Necessary Factors of Production 
The above targets will be achieved by making advances in the following areas: (1) irrigation and soil conservation, (2) use of improved seeds, (3) fertilizer use, (4) crop protection and (5) use of improved techniques. These will be responsible for output increases of 3.5 per cent, five per cent, one per cent and 0.5 per cent respectively 
Small Scale Irrigation 
During the Second Plan additional 40,628 hectares of land were irrigated by various projects. In the Third Plan 175,000 additional acres of land will be irrigated by various large-scale projects. 
Large-scale irrigation projects now supply water to 26,000 hectares of cultivated land; similar projects will irrigate another 160,000 hectares by the end of the Third Plan. 
Large-scale irrigation facilities are not only expensive but also time consuming to construct. On the other hand, minor irrigation schemes are less expensive. Cultivators can put forth their joint efforts to secure additional water. Since the policy is that 50 per cent of the cost minor irrigation is borne by the cultivators who use the facilities, more attention is given to proper use and maintenance. 
In view of the experience during the Second Plan the area to be covered by minor irrigation during the Third Plan will be 45,900 hectares. In addition, in the Terai and the hills, irrigation will be undertaken with tube- well and other arrangements. 
Soil Conservation 
       As a result of indiscriminate felling of existing forests and transient cultivation practices in some areas, 
soil erosion has become a major problem in the hills. Therefore, soil conservation will be one of the programmes to be undertaken in the Plan period. Wherever, possible soil conservation schemes will be carried out along with minor irrigation programmes. In this way not only will the soil be protected but additional water will be made available. Under the combined soil protection-irrigation programme, 21,400 hectares will be affected. 
Improved Seeds 
Higher yielding seeds are important in increasing agricultural production. Improved seeds result in larger output and in crops which can be stored for longer periods. During the Plan, 55.5 thousand metric tons of food grain seeds and 96.6 thousand metric tons of cash crops seeds will be required. A five per cent increase in food grain production will be achieved by the use of improved seeds on 800,000 hectares. The eleven agronomy farms established during the Second Plan will produce 248 metric tons of seed. In the Third Plan, for additional agronomy farms will be established. 
Research and experimentation on seed varieties will be undertaken on the new farms. After experimental work is completed, the nucleus seed will be grown on government farms and distributed among the registered seed producer. The seed producers in turn will grow the improved seeds under the guidance of the technical advisors to be provided by the government. A system of seed growing will be established. To encourage seed cultivators, seeds will be purchased from through the extension service. 
Chemical Fertilizers 
       To increase production, the fertility of the soil must be maintained and improved. To achieve this, the plan calls for the use of 108,076 tons of ammonium sulphate, 25,672 metric tons of potassium and 87,467 metric tons of phosphate. By 1969-70, a total 86,262 metric tons of chemical fertilizers will be required annually. At present the application of chemical fertilizers is very limited. As chemical fertilizer use is relatively unknown to the cultivators, a considerable time period will be needed before chemical fertilizer will be extensively used. Cultivators will be encouraged to use them and to grow more than one crop. Because of transport difficulties emphasis will be placed on the regions where such facilities already exist. Marketing and distribution channels must be established. Moreover, fertilizer requirement during the Plan is very large compared with present use. Therefore, agreements should be made well in advance with fertilizer exporting countries. 
In addition to chemical fertilizer, compost, which can be produced within the country, and green manure are also important in increasing production. As the latter types of fertilizers are known to the cultivators, it should not be difficult to expand their use. Encouragement will be given with the production and use of green manure. 
Plant Protection 
An estimated 15 per cent of the total crop production is destroyed by plant diseases and insects. Thus, a corresponding increase in the Plan period could be achieved if the crop were fully protected from damage and destruction. However, it is not possible to carry out such a program for the entire country within a few years. During the Plan period, plant protection will be carried out on 150,000 hectares covering paddy, maize, sugarcane, jute, tobacco and potatoes. 
Insects such as borers, afid, and others will be controlled by the use of metatoes, folidol, and aldrin chemicals. A plant quarantine program will be carried out to prevent the spread of plant diseases. 
Agricultural Implements 
Although some cultivators realize the importance of agricultural implement in increasing output, improved implements are not produced in Nepal but are imported from India. However, they are not suitable to the soil and climate of the country. For example, the India plough is unsuitable because of the size of the local bullocks. Therefore, an agricultural implements research and production centre was established in Birgunj during the Second Plan. This factory produced and sold 4,500 implements and tools. Since this output is very small in relation to the market, the target for third Plan is the establishment of another one or two agriculture implements production and training centres. These plants will produce some 10,000 implements of various types. In addition, the agricultural supply corporation noted below will market various agricultural implements on a commercial basis. 
 
Agriculture Supply Corporation 
An Agriculture Supply Corporation will be established at the ginning of the Plan period to make available improved seeds, fertilizers, insecticides, and agricultural implements. This Corporation will distribute improved seeds. It will also produce, collect and procure improved seeds, test for purity, protect from insects, and grade the seeds. In addition, the Corporation will make available chemical fertilizers, pesticides, agriculture implement, etc. For this, the Corporation will have keep in close contact with the National Trading Company and, extension services, with the Agricultural Department and Cooperative Banks. Its activities should also be coordinated with the agricultural extension and land reform programmes. 
Horticulture Development 
Nepal has tropical, sub-tropical, and temperate climates which are suitable for horticulture development. The lower regions of the Himalayan belt and the central regions of the country are better suited for the growing of fruits and vegetables than other agricultural products. The Second Plan gave priority to the development of horticulture. By the end of the Plan period, horticulture development centres and orchards were opened in the following places: 
       These centres and orchards conduct experiment and test plants to determine the varieties most suitable 
to various climatic areas. They also sell plant to the public. During the Second Plan they sold 40 thousand improved fruits saplings, 60 thousand banana, pineapple, other fruit seeds and 7 thousand kilograms of improved vegetable seeds to the cultivators. Because of the importance of horticulture, seven new centres will be established during this Plan period. This will increase the number of centres to 23. These centres produce some 760,000 fruit grafts during the plan period. By 1969-70, they will be producing 230,000 fruit grafts annually. 
Vegetable production will be doubted during the Plan period. For this, various vegetable development programmes will be undertaken. Improved vegetable seeds totaling 24,000 kilograms will be produced and sold to the cultivators. Insecticide services will also be provided. Vegetable growing centres will be opened in various parts of Nepal. In Ilam, where potatoes are the main crop, a potato development centre will be established which will produce disease-free stock. During the Plan period, the production of potatoes will be increased by 20 per cent. 
In addition to the production of fruits and vegetables, attention must be given to their preservation. A preservation centre was established at the Kirtipur Horticulture Centre during the Second Plan. Fruit from Dharan, Dhankuta, Pokhara, etc. is brought to this centre where it is tested, canned and sold. In the Plan period, this centre will be expanded and a similar centre will also be established in Dharan. 
Tea plantations in Nepal, especially in the eastern region of the country, appear to be profitable. A Tea Development Broad will be established during the Plan period. This Broad wills mange the tea gardens in Ilam and Soktim. The Broad will replant old tea gardens and establish nurseries to provided seeds. It will also encourage private investment in tea plantations. 
Livestock, Poultry and Fish Improvement 
Since three-fourths on Nepal’s is covered by hills and mountains, there is great potential fo r livestock development. Pastures in the hills can be extensively developed, although relatively few areas are being used at present. Moreover, the northern part of the country is at a higher elevation and thus isles suited for food grain development. Therefore, livestock improvement will be emphasized in these regions. 
Cattle 
As yet, no substantial progress has been made in this field. However, in view of the importance of cattle to the economy, greater stress will be given to this sector in the Third Plan. Brown Swiss, Jersey, Sinthi, and other breeds will be used to improve local cows and increase milk production. Stronger bullocks will be established. A horse farm will be established in Phidim, Mechi Zone, to improve breeds. 
Sheep 
       Sheep herbing is one of the oldest occupations in the country. In the Himalayan belt, there are many families who raise sheep for their livelihood. But, as a result of lack of knowledge of modern techniques and the poor condition of pastures, sheep production has been declining in recent years. Sheep are being imported to meet the meat and wool requirements of the expanding population. A sheep farm was established in Pokhara during the Second Plan in order to improve the local stock by proper feeding, care, and breeding. The experience of this farm shows that a higher altitude area is required for this purpose. A new sheep farm will be established near Kathmandu during the Plan period. Pastures will be developed to encourage sheep farming. Technical and financial assistance will be given to those interesting in undertaking sheep farming on a commercial basis. 
Swine 
Although swine production is a very old activity in Nepal, modern methods are just beginning to be adopted. Pigs imported from the United State for breeding purposes have helped improve quality. Pig farms established in the Rapti and Jiri Valleys have made considerable progress. Under the3 pig chain programme, farmers have been given pigs to rise. The work in this field is progressing well. 
To meet the increasing meat requirements of the people, pig rising on a commercial basis has excellent prospects. Therefore, the farms in Rapti and Jiri will be expanded. New farms will be established in Kathmandu, Biratnagar and Bhairahawa, which will make available improved stock to the various regions of Nepal. Some 5,000 pigs will be distributed every year. 
Poultry 
       Poultry rising has proved to be a successful and profitable business. In the beginning of the Second Plan, there were only ten poultry farms. By the final year of the Plan, this number had increased of 480. The hatchery at Parwanipur with a capacity of 60,000 could produce only one-third of the requirements of the poultry farms. 
The transportation of day-old chickens to all areas of Nepal is difficult. To overcome this problem and to meet expanding demand, four hatcheries, one each in Kathmandu, Birtanagar, Bhairahawa, and Nepalgunj, will be opened during the Plan period. The Parwanipur hatchery will be expended to a capacity of 80,000 chicks a year. These hatcheries will produce a total of 1,100,000 chicks during the Plan period. By 1969-70, the annual capacity will be 300,000. 
Fishery Development 
Fishing in Nepal is still unrestricted. Fish are taken from the streams with the use of dynamite. This should be stopped. In the Second Plan, fast growing carp were imported. Israel carp breeding centres are established at Godavari, Janakpur, Pokhara Parwanipur, Bhairahawa and Biratnagar. The fingerlings were made available stock ponds. It is estimated that fish production during 1962-65 in both the private and public sectors was 100 metric tons. During this Plan period two additional fish breeding farms will be opened. 
The increasing demand for fish as a result of increased incomes has made it essential that fish farming be undertaken on a large scale. A commercial fish farm of 25-40 hectares will be opened at Hetaura to produce fish for sale to customers. By the end of the Plan annual fish production from these farms will be 285 me tric tons. 
Veterinary Services 
The provision of veterinary services is one of the major requirements for agricultural development. During the Second Plan, veterinary services were made available throughout Nepal by opening clinics and hospitals in various areas; 33 dispensaries and veterinary hospitals are now operating and a research center was established to produce vaccines. Mass vaccination has been undertaken to eradicate rinderpest. The present Plan aims at making more veterinary facilities available and at opening 12 dispensaries in the less accessible regions of the country. Four check posts will be opened at Butwal, Dharan, Hetaura and Darchula. By the final year of the Plan, the newly established research center will be producing a broad array of animal vaccines. 
Dairy Farming 
Dairy development has not been given necessary attention. However, there has been progress in cheese production. The Cheese factories at East No. 2, East No. 3, and West No.1 have made considerable progress. Production for the past three years is estimated at some 26,000 kilograms of cheese. A cheese processing plant has been installed in Kathnamdu. Nepali cheese has grained a good reputation in foreign markets. During the Third Plan, eight new cheese factories will be established. These will produce 30,000 kilograms of cheese annually and increase the incomes of 500 yak raising families in the northern part on Nepal. It is estimated that annual cheese production will be 46,000 kilograms by 1970. 
At present, a dairy center is located in Kathmandu. This center collects processes and distributes 500,000 liters of milk. Efforts will be made during the Plan to increase milk production in Kathnmandu Valley and milk will also be collected from outside the Valley. Once this is done the Kathmandu Central Dairy will have a processing capacity of 10,000 liters per day. 
Carcass Utilization 
Presently there are inadequate facilities to utilize animal carcasses. Facilities are needed to get maximum benefits. Such plants are needed to make use of carcass components which would otherwise be wasted. These animals feed supplements. Therefore, carcass utilization plants will be established in selected areas during the Plan period. 
Artificial Insemination 
The number of cattle in Nepal is estimated at 7,300,000. Breeding must be improved; the livestock improvement programme is designed to improve local breeds. To achieve this, an artificial insemination programme was started five years ago. According to the report on this programme, 70 per cent of the artificial inseminations have been successful. However, there has been relatively little effect upon cattle quality. In the present Plan period, this programme will be gradually expanded. In areas where the concentrated in villages and districts where livestock farms and/or veterinary branches exist. Ninety thousand cows and buffaloes will be artificially inseminated during the Plan period. 
Programme Relating to Agriculture 
In addition to the items mentioned above, the agriculture development programme includes other activities. Their purpose is to support and evaluate agriculture development programmes. Some of the main programmes are described below. 
Agriculture Research 
Research activities will be undertaken in the various sections of the Agriculture Department. Work will be done to determine suitability in Nepal of agricultural techniques that have been successful in other countries. Efforts will be made to provide the cultivators with help in increasing agricultural production, i.e. by improved seeds, plants, livestock, implements, fertilizers, and similar factors. Some of those w ill be produced on the farms and units of the department and sold to the cultivators. Items which cannot be produced within the country, such as chemical fertilizers, seeds, and insecticides, will be imported. 
Training 
Middle grade technicians are being trained at the Agriculture School. They are trained to assist the cultivators in making the best use of available resources. A t present, the trainers are given diplomas in agriculture and home sciences. There are also short-term training facilities for field men, field assistants, etc. During the Second Plan 680 were trained. 
Most of the high level technicians required in Nepal— doctors, engineers, and agriculture specialists— receive their training in India. Some 10-15 agriculture technicians are returning from India every year. With the expansion of agricultural activities, high level manpower requirements will also increase. To meet the targets set forth in the Plan, 250 advanced (graduate) and 1,400 middle grades (JTA) technicians will be required. In view of the increased demand, 50 persons will be sent to India and abroad for technical training during the Plan period the middle grade technicians will be trained locally. An agriculture College will be established during the Plan period. 
Agricultural Extension 
       Agricultural production will not increase unless improved techniques are adopted by the cultivators. 
This will not be possible unless a link is established between the experimental stations and the cultivators. Contact between these two groups is maintained through agricultural extension. Under this programme, middle grade technicians go into the field and demonstrate various improved techniques to the cultivators. When problems arise, those technicians ask the relevant technical section for advice. 
At present there are 120 agronomy JTAs; nine Home Science JTAs and 29 other JTAs who are responsible for extension activities in the various districts. These technicians work under the guidance of the district panchayats. To provide technical assistance to these JTA, one agricultural extension officer is stationed in each zone. Unless the various factors of production such as improved seeds, fertilizer, insecticides are available, times and places at a reasonable price, supply centres will be established in various areas. Extension services will cover 900,000 hectares during the Plan period. 
Agriculture extension to date has not been very successful because of the lack of transport facilities, technicians, and coordination with other developmental programmes, improved seeds, fertilizer, credit and efficient administration. Necessary steps will be taken to overcome these difficulties. The extension program will also undertake a campaign to stimulate the production of wheat and vegetables. 
Extensive publicity on agricultural problems and their solutions is necessary. Therefore, a publicity programme has been included in the Plan. This will be managed by a separate section. 
Agricultural Economics and Statistics 
The purpose of this programme is to collect agricultural and related data and to study the potential of agricultural industries. This programme will also study and analyze land use, crop production, livestock use, weather conditions, prices of agricultural products, marketing systems, the village economy, cultivation techniques etc. Grading of agricultural products and quality control will also be started. Although, agriculture in a vital part of the economy, there is inadequate data on agriculture at present. To undertake effective programmes, much more data is needed. Efforts will be made together as much data as possible. 
Resettlement Programme 
Since the non -agricultural sectors of the economy are still undeveloped, increases in population must be at least partially absorbed in agriculture. Population pressure on land is severe in the hill regions. It is less serious in the Terai since there are still cultivable lands available. People have been moving out of the Terai. They clear the jungles and settle wherever they can. Often these people move from one place to another, clearing a different area of the jungle leach time. This kind of unorganized clearing and cultivation reduces the forest resources of the country. 
Progress made up to the present time 
The first organized resettlement programme was started by His Majesty’s Government in the Rapti Valley during the First Plan. Under this programme, 10,000 hectares of land were distributed for the settlement of 5,000 families. Other facilities such as schools, hospitals and market areas were also made available. 
During the Second Plan, additional families were resettled. In the Nawalpur project in Lumbini zone 700 families were resettled on 1,850 hectares. 
Programme under the Third Plan 
During the Third Plan, population is expected to increase at the r ate of 150 thousand annually. Of this, ninety-five thousand will occur in the hill regions. This will place even greater pressures upon cultivable land in the hills. To help reduce, the pressure, 6,000 families will be resettled on 13, 900 hectares of land in Banke, Bardia, and Kailali Kanchanpur and Udaipur districts during the Plan period. 
 

CHAPTER VIII 
Land Reform and Land Administration 
 
The objectives of the Land Reform programme in Nepal are to ensure a fair share of the fruits of his production to the cultivators by putting an end to exploitation, and to encourage labour and capital to shift from agriculture to other sectors. These objectives are not limited to an equitable distribution of present production alone. The cultivators will be given greater incentive to increase production. This encouragement will be in the form of tenancy rights, low cost credit and the opportunity to retain the profits of their increased effort. 
The land Reform Act of 1958 and the Birta Abolition Act of 1960 
Land Reform legislation was first passed in 1958. The Act called for fixing maximum rent at 50 per cent of the yield, imposing a ceiling of interest rates at 10 per cent, eliminating forced labour, and providing security of tenure for those who had tilled a given piece of land for more than a year. This Act could not be effectively implemented because of the absence of adequate records of land ownership; no sources of the credit other than the landlords and merchants; an d, above all, the absence of efficient land administration. 
The Birts Abolition Act of 1960 and the Estates Abolition Act of 1963 also deserve mention. According to the Birts Abolition Act, all the lands which were entirely or partially exempted from and revenue were removed from that status. The ownership of these lands was assumed by His Majesty’s Government. Under the Estates Abolition Act all estates were dissolved. 
Despite these measures the condition of the cultivator did not improve. Lack of tenancy records, the limited number of cooperative societies, and the slow progress of the cadastral survey were some of the barriers. 
The specific objectives of the present Land Reform programme are: to prepare full records of tenancy, to provide alternative sources of credit to expedite the progress of the cadastral survey work and to establish an efficient and modern system of land administration. Although, a majority of the people in Nepal own some land, much is owned by relatively few people. This fact has direct bearing upon agricultural production, particularly in the Terai region. Moreover, the presence of middlemen in the land system affects the income on the peasant. The final impact of the evils of the existing land system is upon the peasant. Though the function of the Zamindari system was to help the government collect land revenue, it because a means of exploitation. Therefore, the abolition of the Zamindari system is essential to Nepal’s development. 
The Land Reform Act of 1964 
A new land reform measure was enacted in 1964, which is of major importance from the economic and social points of view. Rights of both landlords and tenants have been secured by this Act. The salient features of the Act are: 
 
1. Abolition of the Zamindari System. 2. Ceiling on land ownership of 17 hectares in the Terai, 4.11 hectares in the hills, and 2.67 hectares in Kathmandu Valley. 3. Ceiling of tenancy holdings of 2.67 hectares in the Terai, 1.02 hectares and 1.51 hectares in Kathmandu Valley and the hills respectively. 4. Security of tenancy rights. 5. Fixing of rent at no more than 50 per cent of production. 6. Abolition of sub-tenancies. 7. 	A compulsory saving program to provide an alternative source of credit, and the interception of loan repayments to private lenders. 
Progress to Date 
       A considerable period of time is necessary to implement the above listed provisions on a national scale. 
The Land Reform Programme had been implemented in 16 development districts1by the end of t he Second Plan. The programme will cover the rest of Nepal in the first few years of the Third Plan. In nine of the 16 districts in which work was undertaken during the Second Plan, cadastral survey work was carried on together with the identification of tenants and the distribution of provisional certificates of tenancy. These provisional certificates will be replaced by the issuance of permanent certificates at a later date. 
Other phases of the programme — fixing rent, collecting data on production, preparing tenancy records, recording debts, collecting compulsory savings deposits, intercepting debt repayments and acquiring land in excess of the legal ceiling or holdings— are also underway. 
To date, the cadastral survey has covered 57,333 hectares of land is 250 Village Panchayats. Records for 182,000 tenants have been issued to 64,500 tenants. 
In seven districts, activities such as the preparation of debt records, tenancy holdings, compulsory savings collection, and the organization of ward commit tees for the interception of loan repayments are in full swing. Savings in kind have amounted to 31,481.17 metric tons and in cash to Rs. 850,000. Records have been complied for more than 300,000 contributors. The loans advanced by these committees to the peasants have amounted to Rs 85,000 and 851.22 metric tons in cash and in kind respectively. 
Difficulties Faced by the Programme 
The preparation of land records and the identification of tenants are progressing satisfactorily. This achievement can be ascribed to the existence of special courts. However, the forced eviction of tenants from land in some of the districts has become a major problem. Delay in cadastral survey work is another obstacle to the progress of the Land Reform programme. The cadastral survey work, which will be discussed later, should be separated from the Land Reform Programme. The Compulsory Saving Scheme is progressing satisfactorily. The realization of debt repayments from the cultivators is not satisfactory. It may be attributable to the fact that this work was started after the harvest season. 
The Land Reform Programme under the Third Plan 
The Land Reform Programme will be completed in the early years of the Plan. Tenancy rights will be secured and an alternative system of credit will be established. The cadastral survey work, redistribution of excess holding, establishment of land of land administration, permanent credit facilities and agriculture development world will be continued through the Plan period. Since one goal of the programme is no improve the economic condition of the cultivator by giving him land ownership, efforts will be made to realize this goal in the Third Plan period. Cadastral survey work on all cultivated land and the creation of an efficient and modern land administration system is of special importance. 
Cadastral Survey 
Land revenue assessment in Nepal is based upon many factors. The quality of seed used on the land, the area of land that can be ploughed by a pair of oxen in a day, the area of land that can be dug by spades in a day, and chain measurement are some of the bases for assessment. The present records are not accurate since 
 
1The 16 development districts are Kathmandu, Lalitpur, Bhaktapur, Kabhre Palanchowk, Sindhu Palanchowk, Nuwakot, Dhading, Rasuwa, Bara, Parsa, Rautahat, Bardia, Kailali, Jhapa, Chitawan and Makawanpur. they do not correspond to data secured by actual measurement. The need for an accurate cadastral survey is apparent. Its main purpose is to determine the boundaries of the land and to classify the land properly. 
Cadastral survey work in Nepal was started before 1923 but no maps were prepared on the basis of the surveys. From 1938 to 19478, six districts were surveyed using the plain table method. During the First Plan period, only 434,000 hectares of land were surveyed and 134,400 hectares registered. This was considerably less than the plan target of 55 per cent of the total cultivated land. During the Second Plan, maps were prepared for 365,200 hectares, 512,400 hectares were registered and land records were prepared for 490,400 hectares. The Plan target was 801,717 hectares of land. 
The progress of the cadastral survey work has been slower than anticipated and the methods are technically unsatisfactory. Adequate data regarding tenancy was not collected accepts for that part of the cadastral survey work conducted under the Land Reform programme. An additional 799,880 hectares of land will be survey during the Third Plan. The target which has been set considering the capacity of the existing facilities is relatively low. Additional surveyors will bee trained during the plan period. 
Land Administration 
The data collected under the cadastral survey programme will reveal the amount of land on which land revenue payments are less than full assessment or are not recorded at all. This will provide a sound basis for increasing revenue together with the establishment of an efficient land administration unit. The need for such a unit is also clear form the fact that the administration of land should be coordinated with the land reform programme. Resettlement on newly reclaimed land is also necessary. In view of these considerations, His Majesty’s Government has decided to establish a separate department of land administration. The activities of this department will be initially limited to those districts where the land reform programme is underway. 
 

CHAPTER IX 
Agricultural Credit and Cooperative Development 
 
Credit facilities have an important role ion the development of agriculture. The Present agricultural system cannot be improved without credit. 
       There are various kinds of credit required in Nepal. Short term credit up to one year is needed to provide the farmers with improved seeds, fertilizers, and small tools and for payment to labour hired for planting and harvesting. Medium term credit for three to five years is needed to finance tube wells, land clearing and large implements. Long term credit is required to develop new lands and to buy farm machinery. 
Only short and medium term credit can be provided under the present system. The government has provided long term credit for settlement of new lands. However, there is no established system of providing such credit. Landlords and merchants are the main sources of credit. Credit given by these private sources becomes a means of exploitation. At present the development of cooperatives is in its initial stage in Nepal. The amount of credit provided by the cooperatives is small because of the difficulties of administration and loan processing. One of the objectives of the Land Reform programme is to make credit available at reasonable interest rates. 
Development of Cooperatives 
Cooperatives have an important role to play by bringing together small cultivators with their limited resources. The financial condition of most cultivators is very poor. Their position is worsened by the interest rates and other condition imposed by private credit sources. The experience of other developing countries indicates that plentiful credit at reasonable interest rate stimulates development. This can be major contribution of the cooperatives. Therefore, the agriculture system will be developed through cooperative organizations. They will make credit available at reasonable rates of interest. In the Rapti Valley resettlement program, landless cultivators were given credit through cooperatives. A total of 1109 cooperative societies, cottage industry and consumer cooperatives, two Districts consumer institutions and 14 district-level marketing and credit cooperatives were established during the last three years. 
Program for the Third Plan 
There are various reasons fo r the slow progress of cooperative development to date. Most of the farmers are illiterate and poor. Under these conditions it is difficult to develop administrative skill necessary for the development of cooperatives. The present number of organized cooperative committees and the volume of field activities are limited. Because of these small scales, societies find it difficult to work commercially. Again, if the societies are limited only to credit, they cannot provide full benefit to the cultivators. Therefore, expanded field work and the establishment of production and marketing societies are necessary. 
Three hundred fifty large multipurpose cooperatives will be established during the Third Plan. These will not be limited to credit but will also be marketing and supply units as well and encourage cottage industry development and undertake management of god owns. These institutions will be organized in those districts where land reform work is underway. One cooperative institution will be organized for each village Panachayat. 
Efforts will be made to develop experimental cooperative in the agricultural sector. For this purpose, ten agricultural cooperatives with a total of at least 1,000 families will be organized. In addition, ten consumer institutions in urban areas 75 industrial cooperatives will be established. Emphasis will be given to paper, metal working, carpets, textiles, ceramics, nickel-plating, soap, curios, carpentry, furniture, and fruit canning activities for the industrial units. 
In total, 545 new cooperatives will be organized. A total of 30 cooperative federations will be established at the district level to provide management assistance and to coordinate the activities of the primary institutions. A national Federation will be organized with the district units as members. 
Coordination with the Land Reform Programme 
A multipurpose cooperative will be established in each village panchayat where full implementation of the Land Reform has taken place. Resources to assist these multipurpose institutions will be provided. Only a limited number of cooperatives will be established over the next five years because of administrative limitations. These institutions will be supervised by a committee with representatives from each ward. 
The cooperatives will assess the members, prepare agricultural development plans, collect savings, supply consumer goods and manage god owns. As the primary institutions are the cooperative movement, efforts will be made to solve the problems faced by these units and to meet their financial needs. Government activity in this field will be conducted through these institutions. 
Cooperative Organization 
A nationwide cooperative federation will be organized. It will prepare and implement a coordinate programme of cooperative activities. District cooperative federation will be established and will be members of the national federation. Village panchayat cooperatives will, in turn, be members of the district federations. The district units will provide funds for credit purposes and assist in marketing agricultural products. 
Training 
Trained personnel are needed for efficient operation of the cooperatives. In the absence of such personnel, cooperative development will suffer. Development staff and higher society officials will be trained. Short term training will be given to cooperative auditors and sub-inspectors. The managers of the village panchayat cooperatives, supply and marketing supervisors, ward supervisors and supply officers will also be trained. 
Banking Facilities 
The present Cooperative Bank will supply loans to the farmers through the cooperative institutions. This bank was established in 1963. It has a major role in providing necessary credit for the development of cooperatives and the successful implementation of the Land Reform programme. It presently has more than Rs 2.9 million of paid up capital. The bank has played an important role on Jhapa District. Eleven godowns at Jhapa, Nepaljung and Biratnagar have been constructed with the assistance of the bank. The godowns have a total capacity of 8,000 mounds. Loans totaling Rs 100,000 were made available for the resettlement program at Nawalpur. Short term loans have been made available to buy improved wheat seed. 
Credit facilities will be made available only to those areas where the land reform programme has been effectively implemented. The Bank will also handle the compulsory savings under the land reform programme and credit requirements for land resettlement schemes. It will also assist cottage industry development. 
The Cooperative Bank will make loans to cooperative societies. Various difficulties facing cooperative development were mentioned earlier. Agricultural development cannot depend on solely cooperative credit. There is no provision to meet the credit needs of agricultural industries which are of major importance to rural development. These include dairying, sheep grazing, etc. During the Third Plan, an agricultural bank will be established to provide credit for the development of commercial agriculture. A sum of Rs 50 million will be made available for lending by the two banks over the next five years. 
 

CHAPTER X 
Food Grains 
 
The Agriculture Census of 1961-62 indicated that 2,011,664 metric tons of food grain (paddy), wheat, maize, millet etc. were produced in Nepal. As the average annual consumption in Kathmandu Valley and the Terai is 197 kilograms and in the hill area 180 kilogram, total requirements come to 1,754,064 metric tons. The surplus food grains amounting to 257,600 metric tons are exported. Although there is an overall surplus of food grain production in Nepal, some areas of the country, particularly Kathmandu Valley and the hill areas, have a deficit. Because of lack of transportation facilities, it is difficult to transport food grain from the Terai to the hills. The surplus production of the Terai is exported southward. If more storage facilities are provided in both surplus and deficit districts, more will be improved into the deficit areas. 
As there are no quality standards and inspection of food grains, adulteration is practiced to the detriment of the people. If quality controls are effectively imposed, it will be possible to secure higher prices to the cultivators and reduce wastage. The following programmes are included in the Third Plan. 
Godown Construction 
The paddy production of the country is 2,200,000 metric tons, in 1964-65 out of which the Terai produces 1,500,000 metric tons. The surplus in this area should be used to supply the deficit hill areas. The surplus can be exported at higher prices. Therefore, His Majesty’s Government has given priority to the construction of godowns during the period. The processing capacity of the rice mills in Nepal is 1,000,000 metric tons of rice from 1,500,000 tons of paddy. In the absence of godowns, the rice and paddy are exported right after they are harvested. Food grains are imported later to meet the requirements of the people. 
Godowns with a total capacity of 21,575 metric tons have been completed in 12 districts during the Second Plan period. An additional 43,775 metric tons of capacity will be constructed in the hill regions during this plan period. 
During the first year, 19 godowns, with capacities varying from 75 to 500 metric tons will be built in 13 districts. These will have a total storage capacity of 6,850 tons. In the second year 27 godowns will be constructed in 23 different districts with total storage capacity of 6,850 metric tons. In the third year 11 godowns with a total of 6,000 metric tons will be built during the fourth year. Five godowns with a storage capacity of 2,500 metric tons will be built in four districts. 
The construction of these godowns should make it possible to meet more adequately the requirement of the hill districts. If the surplus food grains can be stored in Nepal, they can be exported at higher prices. With the completion of these godowns, market prices of food grains can be stabilized since buffer stocks can be maintained. 
Food Grain Marketing 
His Majesty’s Government will undertake the distribution of food grains from surplus to deficit district. Government will also export food grains. This activity will be expanded as more experience is acquired and administrative capacity is built up. 
Food Research 
The construction of food laboratory will be started during this plan period. Data will be collected on rice milling operations. Research work to reduce food grain damage and loss will be conducted. Studies will be made of possible uses of rice mill waste. 
The possibility of developing a fruit canning and processing industry will be studied. Experiments on fruit and vegetable preservation processes will be undertaken. 
Food inspectors will be trained and posted in various districts to prevent adulteration of foodstuff. 
 

CHAPTER XI 
Forestry and Botany 
 
Forestry 
Forests and wild animals are among the important natural resources of Nepal. The major benefits to be accrued from forest are not only soil protection, timber and fuel by also raw materials for local industrial use and for export. Therefore, forest must be carefully planned and managed. 
Progress in the Second Plan 
Some of the important forest development achievement during the Second Plan were: Construction of 3840 kilometers of forest demarcation lines in nine hill divisions and thirteen Terai divisions; 448 kilometers of fire lines; 480 kilometers of forest trails; and reforestation on 2,454 hectares in Kathmandu, Trisuli, Chautara, Ilam, Pokhara, Salyan and Lumbini areas. In additionm a survey has been conducted to determine the forest wealth of the country and to create a sound base for forest exploitation. Wild life refuges have been established at Chitwan, Kanchapur and Biratnagar. Under training programme one hundred and twelve rangers and 214 foresters have been trained. 
Third Plan 
Projects undertaken during the Second Plan will be continued and other activities will be started. 
Forest Resources Survey: These are: In order to carry out forest management scientifically after evaluation of the nature and condition of forest and its timber volume as well forest survey undertaken in the Second Plan will be continued. This wills facilities national forest products utilization in the future. 
Demarcations: The forest boundary demarcation work started to check the misuse of forest and to develop forest resources along scientific line will be continued. As additional 4,000 kilometers of forest demarcation lines will be constructed during the Plan. This will consist of 2400 kilometers in nine hill divisions and 1,600 kilometers in 14 Terai divisions. 
Fire Production: Four hundred and eighty kilometers miles of fire lines under 16 divisions will be constructed during the Plan to reduce the damage done by fires. During the dry season a team of ten forest guards will be assigned to each division to provide fire protection. 
Forest Road Construction: Forest roads are essential for forest protection and also transporting the forest products. Moreover, such roads will be constructed in this plan period and steps will be taken to maintain the existing ones. Bridges, culverts and drains will be constructed wherever necessary. During the Plan period, a total of 1200 kilometers of fair weather road will be built. 
Afforestation: Afforestation programme has been launched in those areas where forests are destroyed annually. Additional 10,121 hectares of land will be afforestated and turned “trail plots” will be established in the Plan period. 
Wild Life Protection: As present two wild life refuges are under construction to product wild life, particularly the relenocorous. Two more will be constructed during the Plan period. Arrangement will be made establish national parks in protected areas. 
Soil Protection: In many parts of the Hill region, fertile soil is washed away by water. Reforestation programmes to control soil erosion will be undertaken in select areas. 
Silviculture: So far no attention has been paid to this matter. Work on the silvicultural treatment of forests will be started. This involves creeper cutting, thinning, felling improvement, removal of unwanted species, and weeding. 
Forest research work will be undertaken to gather more knowledge of forest resources for the utilization and its development. 
Forest Research: During the Third Plan three research stations will be established; one each in the Hills, Inner Terai and Teri. Experimental work will be undertaken on different species. The stations will also study soil conditions and forest insects in cooperation with the Agriculture Department. 
Forest Extension: Many village people of Nepal earn living from the use of neighboring forest areas. To avoid forest depletion, to stimulate village interest protection, and to educate the people on modern tree plantations, a forestry extension programme will be undertaken during the Plan. The requirement of more trained technician is being felt for the protection, exploitation and development of forest resources. The FRI will increase its existing capacity to train more forest experts. 
Training: Every year 35 rangers and 70 forests will be trained at the center in Hetauda. In addition, short term training will be given to existing staff. More will be sent abroad for advanced training. 
Miscellaneous: The organization and administration of the Forestry Department will be improved and strengthened. Building will be constructed to meet the requirements of the department. 
Botany 
The major objective of the Botany Department is to utilize the country’s medicinal herbs and to create a base for the establishment of pharmaceutical industries. Herbal training and collecting activities have been put into operation for a number of years. A Botanical Department was established for the utilization and development of the herbs and medicinal plants in Nepal. Because of fund shortage and technical personnels, work could not be started in a systematic order in this field. It was as recently as 1961 that a plan was approved and the department was renamed after the Department of Medicinal Plants. This department is consisted if five section viz. Royal Drug Research Laboratory, Royal Botanical Garden, Herbal Farm, Botanical survey and trading centres. A national botanical survey has been conducted to ascertain the variety of medicinal plants in Nepal. Medicinal plants will be grown on the herbal farms and necessary processing will be undertaken at the laboratory. Farmers will be provided financial and technical assistance to encourage them to grow medicinal plants. Due attention will be paid for the development of this sector in order to strength the economy. 
Satisfactory progress has been made in the past few years in pharmaceutical development. The Royal Research Laboratory has been established to analyze and conduct experiments on various drugs. Two regional laboratories have been set up at Nepalgunj and Hetauda. In addition seven herbal farms in different climatic regions (Shreepur, Manichuda, Dhunge, Tistung, Daman, Dharan and Hetuda) have been established. Two herbal trading centres at Kathmandu and Nepalgunj have been opened to market processed herbs. During the Second period botanical survey work was undertaken in Kavre Palanchwok, Ramecchap, Okhaldhunga and Bhojpur. In the West the Baglung, Kutinath, Mustang, Jumla, Doti, and Baitadi areas were covered. A survey has been completed in Bardia, in the Terai and in Chisapani Gadi, in Bagmti zone. A botanical garden has been established in Godavari for the protection and demonstration of various plants, compilation and preparation of herberian sheets are being carried out. 
Third Plan 
The botanical survey and other development work undertaken in the Second Plan period have created a base for the future programme. During the Third Plan the following activities will be carried forward: 
Royal Drug Research Laboratory: The activities of the Research Laboratory will be expanded to include experimentation on various drugs. Production of various medicines and useful oils will be undertaken on an experimental basis from the herbs found in Nepal. Three new regional laboratories will be established during this Plan period. The Research Laboratory will also provide technical advice concerning the establishment of a pharmaceutical industry in Nepal. 
Herbal Farms: Measures will be taken to improve the present seven herbal farms and the work of propagating both native and foreign herbs will be continued. In addition five new herbal farms will be established in different climatic regions. During the Plan 5,000 additional acres will be brought under herbal farming. 
Botanical Survey: The botanical survey, conducted in a few selected areas at present, will be extended to cover the entire country by the end of the Plan period. Information collected by the botanical survey wills republish. 
Herbal Trading Centres: The work of the Kathmandu and Nepalgunj trading centres has been satisfactory. Five other trading centres will be opened in the Terai during the Plan period. Besides providing incentives to herb growers, technical assistance will be provided to them by such centres. 
Royal Botanical Gardens: Improvements will be made in the Royal Botanical Garden in Godavari. More new medicinal and ornamental plants from different parts of the country and from other parts of the world will be introduced. The garden will be extended and beautified in order to demonstrate both the economic and scenic advantages of herbal fa rming. One lavatory will be set up to find ways and means to protect plants, and greenhouse will be constructed for the preservation of plants. One feru house, one cactus house, two orclid houses, one plan house, one office quarter will be constructed during the Plan period. The extension of workshop, library and sales depot. will be undertaken. 
       Incentive to the Herbal Industries: Simple botanical survey and research work is not sufficient to exploit 
the herbal resources of the country. Maximum benefits can be derived only from the utilization of knowledge acquired from the survey and research work. During the plan period necessary technical assistance will be provided to investors to open up new industries utilizing medical herbs or plants. 
 

CHAPTER XII 
Irrigation 
 
A substantial increase in the productivity of the soil is essential to meet the needs of the people The 10 million Nepalese people depend upon the produce of 2.3 million hectares of land. To make a significant increase in productivity, introduction of improved seeds and chemical fertilizers in essential, but the expansion of irrigation facilities is equally important. 
Nepal has been endowed with abundant hydrological resources. The Kosi, Karnali, Gandaki and other rivers provide a continuous flow of water. Large and small river basis range from 1,300 to 6,500 sq. kilometers of territory. When the potential of these rivers is fully realized the quantity of drinking water, irrigation and power available in Nepal will multiply many times over. 
Present Utilization 
       It is estimated theta boot 25,101 hectares of land were under irrigation prior to the First Plan period. In 
the fiscal year 1961-62 an additional 26,397 hectares of land were brought under irrigation to make a total of 51,417 hectares land irrigation before the Second Plan. The target of the Second Plan was to irrigate another 57,287 hectares of land. Two third of the target was achieved by the end of the Plan period. The achievements by the end of the Second Plan period are shown in Table 19. 
Construction of the western Canal of the Kamala River Project and the Khageri Project at Rapti are in process. Preliminary work of the Mohana Canal has also been started. 
Among the surveys undertaken during the Second Plan were (1) the further survey of the Kanchan, Danabs, Banganga and Bagmti Canal projects; (2) the partial survey of the Babai and Kankai projects and (3) preliminary survey of the Sonkosi by the UN special Fund. Surveys of many of the small rivers have been completed. 
The Third Plan 
The five projects started during the Second Plan will be completed during the Third Plan. The Bihul (Spatari) Project was not undertaken because of a lack of information on flow volume. The surveys of the Khatti (Sapatri), Santollar (Palpa), Chope Nahar (Okhldhunga) and Banepa projects were postponed because of technical and technical and transport difficulties. 
 
 
 
 
1Total land area means the total land encompassed by the canal system of each project, although not all such land can be irrigated. Total irrigated land represents that portion which can actually be irrigated. 
Targets in the Third Plan 
Emphasis has been laid on irrigation programme to increase agricultural production during the Third Plan period. The growing population demands higher agricultural output from Terai and irrigation opens an important avenue to reach those goals. 
The Third Plan has a target of bringing irrigation facilities to 177,328 hectares of additional land, including 35,466 hectares to be doubled cropped. 
Program in the Third Plan 
During the Third Plan the following projects will be completed: 
Kamala: Construction of the Kamala Bansje in Dhunkuta district will be completed, bringing new 
irrigation facilities to 25,506 hectares of land. This project will irrigate 50 per cent of the land in Dhunkuta and Saptari districts. 
Khagari: This project which is already underway is the first step in irrigating the Rapti Valley, covering 
6,070 hectares of land in Chitawan. 
Tinau East Canal: The Tinau East Canal, built north-east of Bhairahawa, is expected to bring about 
5,263 hectares of land under irrigation. 
Banganga: The Danaganga canal of Taulihawa will irrigate 8,100 hectares of land in Kapilvastu district. 
Mohana: About 8910 hectares of land in Dhangadhi district will be brought under irrigation by the 
completion of this project. 
Bagmati: All the middle portion of Lands not covered by Kamala and Gandak projects will be irrigated 
by the Bagmati project. This covers 81,000 hectares of land on Rautahat, Bara and Sarlahi districts. The Construction of these projects will be started during the Third Plan period and completed during the Fourth Plan. 
Gandak: This Project, which is under construction by the Indian Government, is expected to irrigate 
65,700 hectares of land in Bara, Parsa and Rautahat district. 
Chatra: The Chatara canal project is under construction as a part of the Kosi Project…. The Project will 
irrigate 60,150 hectares of land in Sunsari and Morang district. 
Other Projects: This covers the medium-size projects to be constructed in the Hill and Terai areas. As 
these areas are under survey, details of construction will be worked out after the surveys are completed. These projects will irrigate a total of 4,049 hectares of land. 
Minor Projects: Projects not involving more than Rs 100,000 will be constructed in the Terai and Hill 
regions according to requirements. 
Hydrological Survey: A hydrological survey will be conducted throughout the country. 
Pre-investment Survey 
       The Irrigation Projects depend on prior surveys. Such surveys are of two types: (1) Reconnaissance and 
(2) Pre-investment. The reconnaissance survey estimated the potential hydrological development. Reconnaissance surveys have been completed in most of the Terai areas during the Second Plan period. Similar surveys will be completed in the mid-western and hill regions by the end of the Third Plan period. Upon the completion of such surveys hydrological development works will be projected for the country. 
Pre-investment surveys provide knowledge on the economic and technical potentialities of the development works. They include topography survey, geological research of dam sites, collection of hydrological data, and surveys of areas to be irrigated and their cropping patterns. A broad outline of proposed project is prepared on the basis of these results and development costs are estimated. Pre-investment surveys will be conducted in the Sunkosi, Kankai, Babai and Rapti River basins during the Third Plan period. 
Utilization of Irrigation Facilities 
Available irrigation facilities in Nepal are not being fully utilized. The growing demands of agricultural production call for maximum utilization of existing irrigation facilities. Stress will be placed upon the repair and maintenance of the existing cannels to derive maximum benefits from them. Assistance will be given to the cultivators to achieve maximum utilization of water resources and will be improved to check the misuse of water. 
Irrigation facilities can provide benefits to the nation in two ways: first, they add to national production, and second irrigation fees directly increase national revenue. Compared with increases in agricultural production, irrigation fees are relatively minor; they are a source of revenue which must be collected to ensure equitability in benefits from irrigation. 
The main reason that revenue has been less than the anticipated is that there are no accurate records of land ownership. The cadastral survey is incomplete in most areas. The land records of Mal Addas cannot be used for revenue purposes because they are not prepared on a geographical basis. Dramatic increase in revenues derived from irrigated land can be expected after the land record system is reformed and maintained in a scientific way under the Land Reform Program. 
The records prepared for tax purposes will be submitted to the district land office. It will be the responsibility of the district administration to maintain proper records and collect land and water taxes. Compared with other countries, Nepal water rate, which comes to about Rs. 1.61 per hectare is very low. It is not enough to meet annual maintenance costs. These consideration points to the necessity of an upward revision of irrigation fees. 
 

CHAPTER XIII 
Panchayat 
 
The Panchayat system is not only a form of political organization but also a most suitable and usefu l medium for the over-all development of the country. His Majesty’s Government has set itself the task of developing the nation by utilizing effectively the available manpower and other sources under the Panchayat system. To succeed, self -reliance among the people must be promoted and a sense of cooperation created among the village, district and zonal panchayat and class organization. Only then can a dynamic society be established which will mobilize the energies and the resources of the people of Nepal for development purpose in an orderly manner. 
During the Second Plan period various development activities were undertaken at all levels: national, district and village. However, it cannot be said that the panchayat organizations at each level were fully utilized. Attempts were made to involve people directly in local administration and to mobilize resources for local development activities. But the progress was not satisfactory. An effective decentralization programme can not be achieved with just by passing laws regarding decentralization. This must be carefully planned to make the programme a successful and monetary assistance provide district and village panchayats by the central government helped them to perform their routine work were effectively. But such measures left unsolved the relationship between central departments and the district and village panchayats. However, the experience of the Three Year Plan period has been of considerable value in shaping plans, particularly when considered in the light of the report submitted by the Decentralization Commission formed two years age by His Majesty. 
Objectives of the Third Plan 
Broad on past experience and present requirements, the Third Plan aims at the development of Panchayats at various levels for the national construction in accordance with the principle of decentralization. 
However, no objectives can generally be achieved simply creating a system. Success of the system largely depends on the general population and their cooperation. The panchayat system and its decentralization programme cannot succeed simply by depending on the initiative and leadership of the elected panchas. It demands the cooperation of the general public. The rate of development of any country under any type of administrative. It is true that the appropriate system can easily encourage the awakened society to march ahead. Hence the foremost objectives of the Third Plan in the process of panchayat development is to reorient traditional thinking patterns and promote self-reliance, and create a sense of cooperation to achieve the goals of national development. 
Decentralization 
The Panchayat system established by His Majesty is not only a suitable political system but also an important medium of mobilizing the resources and successfully implementing the plan. In accordance with the desire of His Majesty, each and every able citizen of the country must have an opportunity to participate in planning various development activities at all panchayat levels. The success of this system will largely depend on the implementation of the decentralization principle. 
       As long as the panchayats at various levels are not given the authority and responsibility to undertake their own development works, these paanchayats will not serve effectively as a medium of economic development. Therefore, His Majesty’s Government is committed to the task of decentralizing the powers to the panchayats for maximum benefit to the nation. 
However, the real intent of decentralization may not be achieved simply by delegating authority to the panchayats. The steps must be taken up in an organized and planned manner. In addition to the authority and responsibility given to the panchayats, financial resources must be made available to carry out the development activities. This also calls for training facilities and technical personnel to assist the organization in their new efforts. 
Implementation of decentralization throughout the kingdom at one time is impossible. Moreover, it is not possible for the central government to pay attention to all levels of the panchayat system at one time. Therefore, an orderly process of decentralization is imperative. Details of the process are given in the Plan Implementation Chapter. It must be mentioned here that the decentralization programme will start first at the district level. The permanent phase of decentralization needs some pre-conditions created and this takes time to achieve. So the decentralization programme has been divided into three successive phases. After the completion of all three phases, all 75 district panchayats of the country will bear considerable administrative responsibility regarding land administration, agriculture, communications, education, health and other development activities. 
 
Training 
The success of the decentralization programme depends largely upon trained personnel. Arrangements will be made to provide training facilities to the official of district and village panchayats. Training will also be provided to selected pancha s and village leaders to make them conscious of their duty and new responsibilities. But the most important task is to form a nucleus team and give them training regarding development programmes to be carried forward in the district. 
Arrangements will be made to provide two types of training to meet the requirements mentioned above. The first type of training will be given to the officials to be appointed at the district and village level to look after the education, health, postal and other services. A great number of officials will be required at village and district levels to make the Third Plan a success. Some of the official who is already at work also needs training to be more effective. As all the officials cannot be trained at one place 14 training centres will be established in the 14 zones within the next decade. During the Third Plan period, five such centres will be opened. Available resources, including instructors, do not permit establishment of all 14 training centres over the next five years. 
During the Third Plan, these zonal training centres will train district and village panchayat officials in administration, cooperative organization, education, health, agriculture and other activities The second type of training by such zonal training centres will be provided village leaders and other 
people. Potential Leaders of class organizations, existing officials of village and district panchayats and others, will receive training regarding the duties and responsibilities of every citizen in the development of the nation. Training facilities should be providing to the class organization workers to enable them to help the people to achieve the goals of decentralization. In total such training will be provided to 9000 individuals from different zones. 
       In addition to the type of training mentioned above, arrangements will be made to hold training session from time to time in remote area of the country to help the people in their day today activities. Such training sessions will be for both men and women and the period of training will vary two weeks to two months. 
Grants in Aid 
One of the chief objectives of the decentralization programme is to mobilize local resources for local development work and to use the resources of the central government for purpose of national significance. Therefore, most of the local needs will be met by the resources of village and district panchayats after the completion of all three phases of the decentralization programme. Therefore, the central government will provide only limited financial assistance to selective purpose. It will take time, however, to decentralization for general administrative and local development costs. Financial help will also be provided to build panchayat buildings. 
 

CHAPTER XIV 
Industry 
 
The rate of economic development of any nation is related to the expansion of industrial activities. Industry not only provides employment, but also increases productively and national income by utilizing of available resources. Additional markets for agricultural products are also created. Thus industrial development and the expansion of agriculture are complement to one another. 
Progress to Date 
Nepal does not have a long history of industrial development. A few small industries were begun during World War II, but most of them did not survive because of technical and operational difficulties. 
Much emphasis was given during the First and Second Plan to establish the preconditions for industrial development. Communications were expanded and transport and power facilities were improved. The Nepal Industrial Development Corporation (NIDC) was founded with a view to providing financial and technical assistance to the private sector. Financial support totaling Rs. 543,000 was extended by NIDC during the First Plan period and Rs 31,600,000 during the Second Plan. 
Two industrial estates have been estab lished and steps are being taken to establish a third. At Balaju Industrial Estate, 13 building have been constructed and six firms have begun production. At Patan Industrial Estate 20 buildings have been constructed and firms have begun production. Construction of the Hetauda Industrial Estate has begun. 
A number of other factories have been established during the First and Second Plan. Public sector industries— e.g. sugar, cigarette, leather and shoe constructed with the assistance of friendly nations have started production. Many units in the sugar, textile, biscuit, woolen textile, leather straw board, carpet,
pharmaceutics and re -rolling fields are being set up in the private sector. The capacity of existing plants producing rice, oil and other products have been increased and steps are being taken to increase the capacity of other e.g. the tourist industry is being stimulated by new hotel construction. 
 
Policies and Priorities Under the Third Plan 
The industrial policy of encouraging and providing maximum facilities to provide sector industries will be continued. Special consideration will be given to increase the productive capacity of existing plants under the industrial development programme. Emphasis will be given export promotion in order to earn foreign currency so that the capital goods needed for industrial growth can be purchased. 
To ensure maximum utilization of limited resources, the order of priorities will be as follows: 
First, preference will be given to such industries as lumber and plywood, paper, sugar, cement, lime and mica. Production of these goods will reduce imports and utilize few materials available in the country. 
Next, industries which will process materials imported in a semi-finished state will be encouraged. These industries will help to reduce the outlay required for imports. 
Third, industries which will displace or reduce the import of products such as textiles, and mustard oil will be given preference where the production costs appear favorable. 
Fourth, industries producing products for export— e.g. jute and tea will be encouraged. 
Fifth, basic industries such as fertilizer, agricultural implements and tools, etc., will be given
consideration, although greater emphasis will be given these in subsequent plans. 
New Industrial Units 
The Brick and Tile and Agricultural tool factories to be built in the public sector will start production during the Third Plan period. Cement, lime and mica factories are also to be established in the public sector. Other industry will be established either in the public sector or the private sector in accordance with the priorities fixed above. 
During the Third Plan period, production targets for selected industries will be as follows: 
Jute: The Jute industry of Nepal, a major foreign currency earner, now has an annual production 
capacity of 15,000 metric tons. This capacity will be doubled during the Third Plan. Anew jute kill will be constructed at Bhadrapur, once the Mechi Bridge is constructed as a p art the East-West Highway. 
Sugar: To meet the increasing demand of sugar and additional 215,000 metric tons of sugar will be 
produced annually to give a total annual production of 43,000 metric tons. 
Cement: A cement factory will be established at Hetauda with a production capacity of 60,000 metric 
tons. 
Paper: A preliminary survey for a paper mill of 15,000 metric tons in the Jhapa district has been 
completed. Construction of the mill, largely with private capital, is expected during the Third Plan. 
Distillery: One alcohol plant will be installed utilizing the by-product, molasses, from the sugar at 
Birgunj. 
Rice and Flour Mills: Mills with a total production capacity of 10,000 metric tons will be established at 
Hetauda and Kathmandu. 
Plywood: Plywood factories with a total capacity of 15 million square feet per year will be established in 
Biratnagar, Hetauda and Dhangadi. 
Solvent: A solvent extract factory of 30,000 metric tons annual capacity will be established in Nepalgunj 
utilizing the by-products of rice mills. 
Brewery: A brewery on 1,136,000 liter annual capacity will be constructed either in Nepalgunj, Hetauda 
or Katmnandu. 
Soap: A few soap factories will be set up in Kathmandu and Hetuada. The target is to product 23,000 
metric tons of soap per year. 
Cold Storage: A cold storage plant of 3,000 metric tons capacity will be installed during the Plan, 
probably in Kathmandu. 
Paint and Varnish: A paint and varnish factory of 1,000 metric tons annual capacity will be established 
in Hetauda. 
Cotton Textiles: During the Third Plan, two cotton textile factories with a capacity of 18 million meters 
will be constructed to meet the domestic requirements for cotton cloth. 
Woolen Textiles: The output of woolen textiles mills is expected to reach 228,000 meters by the end of 
the Third Plan. 
Industrial Surveys 
Pre-investment surveys and the study of market potentials are necessary preconditions for industrial growth. During the Second Plan period, surveys were conducted by NIDC regarding the potential for producing 
products such as tea, plywood, paper. Batteries, bone meal, ghee, canned food, carpets and similar items. During the Third Plan, NIDC and the Department of Industries will continue to press for the establishment of plants to produce these and other products. In addition, other departments — e.g. Mining, Agriculture, Botany
	---are exploring possibilities in their respective fields. During the Third Plan considerable effort will be made to complete in connection with the following: 
1. 	Sodas ash and chlorine 
2. 	Alcohol 
3. 	Paper 
4. 	Starch and dextrose 
5. 	Lime and cement 
6. 	Glass and ceramics 
7. 	Nitrogenous fertilizer 
8. 	Iron and steel 
9. 	Industrial development states. 
Industrial Estates 
Additional industrial estates will be established in selected areas to facilities industrial expansion. After detailed study of the availability of power, transport and communication facilities, five new industrial estates will be installed during the Third Plan period in the following locations: 
Nepal Industrial Development Corporation 
Since its inception in 1959, The Nepal Industrial Development Corporation has been fostering plan development. It has helped revitalize many antiquated industries and provided financial and technical assistance in establishing new industrial units. Moreover, it has encouraged industrial research and planning and provided managerial training to many Nepalese. In the Third Plan, however, these subsidiary activities will be conducted by an Industrial promotion and Productivity Center, to be set up as a subsidiary part of the Corporation. 
Financial support provided to private industry by NIDC during the Second Plan period is shown in Table 22. During the Third Plan, the activities of NIDC will be expanded to provide maximum technical and financial assistance to private businessmen . 
Private businessmen have agreed to invest Rs. 20,500,000 in addition to Rs 20,940,000 made by NIDC during the Second Plan period. In addition to the investment made to encourage private businessmen NIDC has also invested Ts. 5,124,320 in the Balaju and Hetauda industrial estates. 
Organizational Changes and Training 
Necessary steps will be taken to improve the organization and operation of existing and newly created industries in the public sector so that maximum efficiency may be achieved. Feasibility and pre-investment studies will be conducted with considerable care in connection with proposals for new industries of the expansion of those now in existence. 
Both the short and long term requirements of industrial growth must be recognized. Trained and experienced personnel are required in both public and private industry and these requirements will increase many- fold in the years ahead. Therefore, training facilities will be expanded substantially during the Third Plan. As already noted, the training program of NIDC will be given increased emphasis. Two training centers are being established in Kathmandu to train technicians skilled in operating and maintaining power and machine equipment. A training program will also be established in the Hetuada Industrial Estate. 
 

CHAPTER XV 
Cottage and Small Scale Industries 
 
       Cottage industries can play a strategic role in a predominantly agricultural country. A large section of the peasant population is occupied in farming for only a few months of the years. Cottage industry can provide the farmers with employment and income during of off-season. Articles of daily consumption can be produced with a small amount of capital. Hand woven textiles, straw baskets, canned food, brass containers and souvenirs for tourists are some of the items that can be produced on a cottage industry basis in Nepal. Competitions from large scale machine methods of production are keen. But if care is used in establishing cottage industries where the market prospects are good and under circumstances in which both the capital outlay and the opportunity cost of labour are low, this method of production can be a profitable undertaking. 
Progress in the Second Plan 
During the Second Plan period, 1800 people received training in cottage industry methods and techniques. This training was provided by the Cottage Industries Training Centre in Kathmandu and by the various training centers established in the zones. Due to lack of capital and administrative and organizational difficulties, not all of the trainees found employment. Under circumstances which would permit those to utilize the skills acquired. As a consequence, it is clear that the Cottage Industry Programme fell short of its goals. 
Objectives in the Third Plan 
Under the Third Plan, the Objectives will be as follows: 
1. To provide off season employment opportunities to cultivators through the establishment of cot tage and small scale industries. 2. To meet by virtue of goods produced by these methods, many local consumer needs, reduce import requirements and increase the income of the people. 3. To enhance, by the methods of production, the preservation and improvement of traditional arts and handicrafts in Nepal.  
4. To develop those cottage and small scale industries which have foreign currency earning potential. 5. To organize industries on a cooperative basis, thereby enabling craftsmen to pool their efforts in establishing their own productive units. 6. To develop new products and methods of production, and to develop markets for such products. Programme in the Third Plan 
To achieve the above objectives, the following programmes will be undertaken: 
Training: Necessary changes will be made in the training programme to bring it into line with the 
requirements of the above objectives. For example, if improved methods of production are developed, the training programme will be altered accordingly. Training will be offered only in those fields in which employment can be found. 
Extension: The extension programme will be made more effective and practical. Under this pragramme, 
arrangements will be made to provide training in new techniques of production and to provide necessary technical advice to craftsmen. Attentions will be given to developing sources of raw material at reasonable prices. Exhibition will be held to demonstrate new products and production techniques. 
Marketing: Additional cottage industry emporiums and sales deports will be opened at the main trading 
centers and other important places in the country. Agents will be appointed in other places to maximize sales in the absence of emporiums or sales depots. Such emporiums and sales depots will be made self supporting and be operated on commercial lines. Arrangements will also be made for government departments and agencies 
Research and Design Centre: Research activities will be stressed in order to develop improved 
implements and production techniques. New design will also be created and introduced to produce attractive articles. 
Service Centers: Service centers will be established in different parts of the country to provide central 
technical services such as calendaring and finishing operations for the textile industry. 
Karkhana Fail and Orphan Welfare Centre: Existing programmes which provide technical training to 
prisoners and orphan children will be extended. These programmes help such individuals to become usefu l citizens of Nepal. Such programmes will be run by a Board instead of the Department itself. 
Credit and Cooperative Organization: Production of handloom textiles, baskets, woolen goods, clay 
products, and thus become eligible for credit from the Cooperative Bank. During the Third Plan, the Cooperative Bank intends to provide credit totaling Rs. 12,600,000 to 84 cottages and small scale industries. This and small scale industries. This will be of great assistance in the cooperative organization of craftsmen. Such societies will be autonomous bodies based on democratic and cooperative principles. Each society will be owned collectively by the members and managed by a managing committee elected by the members. In due course of time, there will be an organization at the national level which will have the responsibility of providing raw materials and facilities the marketing products of the Societies. 
 

CHAPTER XVI 
The Mineral Industry 
 
Mineral reserves may prove to be an important national resource for Nepal. But knowledge of the location, quality and quantity of these reserves is limited. As a result, very little development has occurred. 
Progress to Date 
A geological survey of about 150 square kilometers of territory has been completed. In addition investigations have been made of the following: 
1. 	Godavari marble mine 
2. 	Copper mines of Kulekhani, Arkhouli and Fikkal 
3. 	Cobalt mines of Summer-Bhavar, Netadarling and Nagre Bharle areas 
4. 	Placer gold in Kali Gandaki basin 
5. 	Coal and Gas of Kathmandu Valley 
6. 	Iron ores of Phulchowki and Lobi River 
7. 	Oil Deposit in Dailekh 
8. 	Shale in the area of the Bander River 
In addition, pre-investment surveys have been conducted in the following places: 
1. 	Mica deposits in Nuwakot and Ramechhap 
2. 	Limestone deposits in Kathmandu and near Hetauda 
3. 	Copper refining unit in Wapsa and Okhaldhunga. Technical assistance has been made available for the small workshops of that area. 
4. 	Thosey Iron Ores: Construction of a laboratory and staff quarters gas been completed. The laboratory is limited to the chemical, metallurgical and geological research branches. Research work and analysis of sample submitted by both public and private sector industries were conducted. 
Third Plan 
Priority has been given to the geological survey activities during the Third Plan period. Preliminary surveys will be conducted to explore the basic mineral resources available. The United Nations is providing technical experts to assist in this undertaking. Once the preliminary geological survey locates mineral deposits, an intensive survey will be undertaken in the second phase to determine quantity, quality and other basic information. Moreover, during the Plan period, attention will be given to the preparation of geological maps of those areas feasible for commercial exploitation. 
In addition, preliminary as well as detailed survey work will be continued for mineral oil and gases in Piuthan, Chisapani, Jhapa and Morang districts. Further study will be made of the feasibility of establishing an iron industry using the iron deposit of Phulchowki. 
A detailed survey of copper deposits in Eastern Nepal will be completed during the Plan period. Initial steps will be undertaken to establish a copper processing plant near the richest deposits. Field surveys of placer gold in the basins of the Gandhaki and Rapti rivers will be continued. Work will also be undertaken to find other metals such as cobalt, nickel, etc. A study will be completed during the first year of the Third Plan to determine whether the production of mica is feasible on a commercial basis in Easter and western Nepal. 
Because of the increasing demand for construction materials in Nepal, detailed studies will be made of lime, limestone, Chinese clay, quartz and other deposits. Accordingly a survey of limestone at Bhainse and Kathmandu and of sand and quartz for glass production at Hetuada and Kathmandu will be conducted. The above efforts will be of great importance in establishing mineral industries in the Fourth plan period. 
Buildings for the Research Laboratory and associated Research Centers will be completed and modern analytical equipment will be installed. 
 

CHAPTER XVII 
Tourism and Archaeology 
 
Tourism 
 
Tourism is an important source of national income and foreign exchange for many countries of the world. Tourism is increasing in popularity and the inflow of tourists into Nepal is rapidly rising. Adequate transport facilities and modern hotel arrangements are necessary conditions for the development of tourism. Inadequate air transport and hotel facilities in Nepal have become the bottleneck to its development. However, the efforts made during the Second Plan period helped greatly to overcome such difficulties. During the Third Plan, therefore, greater stress will be placed on increasing air transport and hotel facilities in order to derive the maximum benefits from tourism. 
During the First Plan the Tourist Department was established and the Tourist Information Centre opened. As a result the increasing number of the hotels in Kathmandu, and such other facilities Tourists increased from 2,056 in 1958 to 5,954 in 1961 and 9,976 in 1964. The details are given in Table 23. 
As present, 270 hotel beds are available and additional 400 hotel beds will become available after the completion of two hotels now under construction in Kathmandu. Buildings at Kakani, Pokhara, Daman, Lumbini and Nagarkot have also been constructed for tourists. 
Third Plan 
It is estimated that by the last year of the Third Plan, 20,000 tourists will be visiting Nepal. By 1969-70 India expects to receive 200,00 tourists. It should be possible for Nepal to attract at least 10 per cent of them. 
The construction of Gaucher Runway is expected to be completed Hotel capacity will be doubled after the completion of hotels which are under construction at present. In addition, the construction of a new hotel with modern fitting and facilities is planned. Hotel of international standard will be constructed at Biratnagar and Pokhara. Other facilities will be developed to lengthen the average period of stay of the tourists. Internal transport facilities will also be expanded. 
To provide facilities to visitors traveling over Tribhuwan Rajpath by car, the construction of an office building in Birgunj is envisaged under this programme. The representatives of the concerned offices of HMG will be the staff of this office in order to help tourists with customs and immigration formalities before entering Nepal. A building will be constructed in Kathmandu to house the Department of Tourism and the central offices of the Royal Nepal Airlines Corporation. 
To further publicize Nepal on international scale films of Nepalese attraction will be made and distributed. Tourist literature will also be distributed. 
Sight seeing in Nepal is not only limited but also expensive. The Department of Tourism will develop sight seeing facilities in Kathmandu. 
Tourists are national guests and the responsibility of inviting them to Nepal falls not only on he Department but also upon all Government officers and other related agencies. All visitors coming in both on official and non-official capacity must be treated well to make them feel comfortable and at home. Attempts will be made to simplify legal and administrative procedures so that a minimum of inconvenience will occur. 
Archaeology 
The ancient history of Nepal is glorious. But research required to record this past is of recent origin. Recently the Archaeology Department was created to preserve objects of historical importance. The Department has conducted the excavation and study of about 60 historical places in the last three years. Many antiques have been discovered at six of these places— e.g. at Tilaurakot the remains of a civilization dating back to 600 B. C. has been found. 
Excavations at Hadigaun and Lazimpat in the valley have been completed. The remnants of a 1400 year old civilization have been found at Hadigaun. Surveys of the Chovar cave in Kathmandu Valley and the Mahendra cave in Pokhara have been completed. Records of the numerous temples of the Valley have been collected. AT present there are six museums under the Archaeology Department. The National Numismatic Museum is being constructed and will be under the Department when completed. Thirty-one books have been published in the Departmental publication series. Other Publications will report the research done by the Department. 
Third Plan 
Preservation of Temples: Several temples and other old artifacts are major tourist attraction in the 
Valley. These are not properly maintained at present; extensive renovation and continued maintenance are urgently needed. Plans to preserve these historical objects, therefore, will be implemented in three Durbar Squares. 
Preservation of Historical Museum: A plan has been worked out to preserve different places of 
historical importance, including Lumbani, Kapilvasto, and the birth place of Lord Buddha. Necessary measures will be taken to be of historical importance. 
Mahendra Archaeological: Arrangements will be made to collect and preserve the objects of artistic 
value in the museum which is under construction at present. 
Archaeological Garden: The construction work of an archaeological garden in the area of Bhandarkhal 
in Lalitpur will be undertaken. Many objects of artistic and historical value will be placed in the garden for the attraction of tourists and other interest people. 
National Archives Building: The construction of a national archives building will be completed during 
the first year of the Third Plan. The building will be well furnished and a system of keeping the records of all objects of historical importance in a scientific and modern method will be followed. 
Lumdini: A master plan will be prepared for the future development of Lumbini garden. Necessary steps 
will be taken to receive financial assistance form different Buddhist Associations of friendly nations to construct and establish a library in Lumbini. The archaeological excavation and research work will be expanded during the Third Plan period. Results of such work will be published. Archeologists will be encouraged to undertake research and excavation work of historical places. 
 

CHAPTER XVIII 
Foreign Trade 
 
Foreign trade is of strategic importance in this age of increasing mutual relationship and cooperation among the various countries. It is especially important for the developing countries since they have to import new techniques technical knowledge and many products from developed countries. From the long term point of view, trade can contribute greatly to the economic development of a country. External markets are large relative to its domestic market, and the cost of imports can be offset by expanding exports. Hence, it would not be wrong to say that trade development is an integral part of planning for economic development. 
Growth of Foreign Trade 
In the present Nepalese economy, international trade plays but a limited role. Available statistical data in the field of trade are not adequate. Nevertheless, the growth of trade in recent years has been sufficient to justify considerable optimism regarding future prospects. As tables in the appendix reveal, the volume of foreign trade has increased three times within five years: imports have risen 281 percent and exports 362 percent. 
Characteristics of Trade 
Eighty-five percent of Nepalese exports consist of food and raw materials. In 1961-62, food alone made up 65 percent of total exports. But the exports of finished goods have been expanding only 1.5 percent of total exports in 1957-58 consisted of finished goods, and then had raised to 13 percent by 1961-62. 
Seventy percent of total imports consist of food, cigarettes, finished products, gasoline, oil and other minor items. In the last few years, though the imports of finished consumption goods have increased, imports of food have decreased. Imports of goods related to industrial development have been increasing. 
It is obvious from this short summary that Nepal, like many other developing countries, depends on the export of primary goods and the import of consumer goods and producer goods. Fluctuations in the rise of primary goods and increases in the imports of consumer and producer goods may have adverse effects upon the Nepalese development effort if corrective measures are not taken. 
Most of Nepalese trade i.e. more than 90 percent is with India. Trade with China is still relatively small. Trade with overseas countries is very small, although it has been increasing during the last few years. Nepal exports jute and jute goods to overseas countries and imports construction materials, producer and consumer goods from these countries. Imports of capital goods will continue to increase, a part of which must come from hard currency areas. Therefore, to meet hard currency payments, exports to overseas countries must be increased. 
Balance of International Trade 
Table 24 shows that there has been a deficit every year on the balance of international trade. This deficit may be overstated because the statistical data are not complete. There is no record, for example, of some of the export of timber, leather and jute on which custom duties are not levied. As discussed elsewhere foreign exchange holdings of the Nepal Rastra Bank, particularly of Indian currency, have been increasing. Although foreign aid and domestic monetary policy have also had an impact upon these holdings it seems reasonable to conclude that had there been continuous and severe trade deficits, these holdings would have been much less. 
 
Nevertheless it is necessary to stress that, on the basis of data available the international trade balances have been unfavorable. Some improvement has become evident during that last few years, partly because prices of exportable goods have risen, but also because quantities exported have increased. 
Foreign Trade in the Third Plan 
Given the foregoing characteristics of Nepalese trade, the following policies will be stressed in the Third 
Plan: 
Increase in Exports 
Efforts will be made to increase exports by 100 per cent within the coming five years. It is obvious that since import of production goods from development countries will be increasing, exports to overseas countries should be increased as much as possible. To achieve these objectives, production of exportable goods such as paddy, jute, oilseeds, etc, will be increased and special attention given to those which can be exported to overseas countries. In addition, foreign exchange advantages will be provided to the exporters. At the same time, attempts will be made to improve the quality of export goods. 
Change in the Volume of Imports 
To reduce the foreign trade deficit, it is anticipated that the volume of imports must also be reduced, in addition to expanding exports. To achieve development goals, however, imports of capital goods must increase. Therefore, to reduce imports as a whole emphasis must be placed upon reducing consumer goods imports. As a compensating measure, domestic production of consumer goods imports. During the Second Plan, this objective was fulfilled to some extent through the constr4uction of the sugar, cigarette and shoe factories. The Private sector has also stepped up the production of consumer goods. Additional measures will be undertaken during the Third Plan, as noted in the chapter on industry. 
Diversifying Trade with Developed Countries 
In recent years, the volume of imports form China and the USSR have been increasing. But this has been in the form of aid instead of trade. During the Third Plan, attempts will be made to further diversify trade by trade treaties with overseas and developed countries by other measure. 
Increasing Auxiliary Services 
In the country at present, there is still a lack of the necessary conditions for trade. Transportation, banking and insurance facilities are not adequate. Improvements in these fields must precede large increases in trade. In the Third Plan period, steps will be taken to overcome these short comings. 
 

CHAPTER XIX 
Power 
 
Power is a basic requirement in the economic development of any country. In Nepal, there hydroelectric power potential is immense because of abundant water resources. However, development to date is not satisfactory and serious thought has to be given power development during the Third Plan period. Lack of adequate transport facilities, hydrological survey data and technicians cause many bottlenecks. Yet the efforts made are not discouraging. The total power at the beginning of the Second Plan was less than 10,000 kilowatts. The Second Plan set a target of generating an additional 30,000 kilowatts by implementing various projects to meet the growing demand for power. Thus installation of associated transmission lines and improvements in distribution systems was also included in the Plan. 
It is now estimated that during the Second Plan power capacity was increased by only 7,500 kilowatts by the various projects which were implemented. The first phase of Trisuli Hydel Project could not be completed. Only one unit of the projects was installed during the Second Plan. This unit designed to provide an additional 3,000 kilowatts of power will not be in production until late 1965. Other projects completed, or nearly so, during the Second Plan are Panauti (2,400 kilowatts) and the Birgunj and Patan diesel plants (2000 kilowatts). In addition, considerable progress has been made in installing diesel plants in Biratnagar and Hetauda. Hydrological survey has also been conducted on the Karnali, Kulekhni and Other rivers. 
Third Plan 
 
To determine the demand of industrial concerns and households for power a plan has been framed dividing the country in three broad sections: Eastern, Central and Western. Projections regarding the future development of industries and population growth have been prepared for each and power requirements estimated. On the basis of this, a target of installing power capacity totaling 60,000 kilowatts has been set for the Second Plan. 
Central Section 
The present total available power supply in the Central section, comprising the areas of Kathamndu, Birgunj and Hetauda, is 12,000 kilowatts. It is estimated that at least 60,000 kilowatts will be needed by the end of this Plan period. The following power projects, after their completion, will produce additional power to meet the growth power demand: 
In addition, the Gandaki Project which is being constructed by the Government of India is expected to provide 10,000 kilowatts of power to Nepal by the end of the Third Plan. Even then, the combined output of all these projects will not be enough to meet the requirements noted above. The installation of another power plant is essential. A detailed survey for power plants on the Marsyandi, Kali and the Kulekhani rives and for another plant on Trisuli rivers will be conducted in the first year of the Plan. Construction of the most beneficial projects will be undertaken in the second year. The power plants selected for construction will presumably be large enough to provide the additional power needed during the Plan period. The new project will generate at least 16,000 kilowatt of power by the end of the Plan period. 
The construction of 66 KV transmission line and substations Kathmandu, Hetauda and Birgunj will be completed. Additional 11 KV and 33 KV transmission lines and substations will also be installed. Upon completion of these projects power distribution in Kathmandu Valley will be through 220 volt lines.
Transmissions lossed which are now estimated to be 40 percent will be reduced to 10 per cent. 
Survey will also be conducted in the Bhairawa, Butwal. Bharatpur and Hetauda areas and a transmission system (or systems) designed accordingly. 
Eastern Section 
Installed power capacity today is 5,000 kilowatts. Compared with future requirements, this is a negligible amount. Generating capacity totaling 9,000 kilowatts will be made available during the Third Plan. This will include a 1,470 kilowatts diesel plant at Biratnagar and 7,500 kilowatts form the Kosi Project; both of which are now under construction. 
To provide still more power for the estaer sector, hydrological data will be collected for the Kanaki and other fivers of the region and at least preliminary development planas prepared. It is anticipated; however that actual construction of these additional plants will be installed, therefore, to meet the power requirements of towns in Jhapa, Illam and Saptari districts on a temporary basis through NIDC assistance. To link the Kosi generating plant with Biratnagar, a transmission line will also be constructed. 
Western Section 
Power facilities in the western section are almost non-existent at present. One diesel plant with a capacity of 500 kilowatt will be constructed in Nepalgunj in the first year of the Plan period. Since there is little possibility of starting hydroelectric projects in the near future, small diesel plants will be installed to meet the growing demands for power. The major effort in the West will be to complete the study of the Karnali river and to begin construction of the first phase. 
Organization Reforms 
Measures will be taken to improve the administration of the Department of Electricity and the Electricity Corporation to coordinate the effects of the two organizations. Establishment of a central power Authority is under consideration. Its purpose would be to prepare a long term master plan for the production and distribution of power and to supervise the power generating units in the eastern section. 
 

CHAPTER XX 
Transport 
 
Transportation has a strategic role to play to bring about efficiency and coordination in administration and to increase the volume of internal trade. Both are essential to the process of industrialization. Priority was given to transportation in the First and Second Plan, but the headway made so far is negligible in comparison to our needs. The mountainous terrain of Nepal makes construction of reads a difficult job; the development of a railway system is quite impossible; and air transportation is very expensive. In this situation plans for the development of the transport system of Nepal must be prepared both from a short term and a long term point of view. With these objectives in mind His Majesty’s Government invited thee International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development to survey the existing transport system, make projections regarding future needs, and prepare a master plan for transport development. The following elements of the plan for transport are based upon the study. 
Road Construction in the First and Second Plan 
Before the launching of First Plan the total length of all roads in Nepal was 624 kilometers. Including of 368 km. of fair-weather roads. The First Five Year Plan set a target of building 1440 more km, including 480 km. of metal led roads and 960 km. fair weather roads. In 1958, the Regional Transport Organization (RTO) was established in a tripartite agreement between His Majesty’s Government and the Governments of India and the Unites States to construct these roads. But technical and other difficulties made it impossible to achieve the targets as set the Plan. In 1961, the RTO was dissolved. 
High priority was also given to the development of transport during the Second Plan period. The targets was to build 1440 km. of roads, including 320 km. of all weather roads were constructed. By the end of the Plan period only 820 km. of roads were constructed. Of this total 849 were fair-weather roads: 621 km. of the East-west Highway, 112 km. of the Kathmandu-Kodari Highway, 54 km. near Kailabas and Ghorahi, 29 km. in Dang and 13 km. in the Saptari-Kunoli and Ratna Ray Path. Only 72 km. of all-weather roads were constructed. Thus most of the roads constructed in Nepal so far are fair-weather jeep able roads. Only 454 km. of all-weather roads exist. 
Road Construction in the Third Plan 
During the Third Plan, 1604 km. of roads will be built including 720 km. of fair-weather roads. In addition existing roads will be renovated. Table 25 shows the roads to be constructed during the Third Plan period. 
East-West Highway 
The construction of 381 km. of roads stretching from Mechi in the east to Adhawar in the west will be completed during the Plan period. This will line all important towns, production centres and markets of the eastern 
Terai with Kathmandu, since the Raxual-Kathmandu roadway joins the East-West Highway. The existing portion of the East-West Highway, Stretching from Hetauda to Narayan Gadh, will be improved. From Narayan Gadha west to Butwal the road will be extended on a fair-weather basis, Survey, design and cost estimates will be completed on the remaining portion running 432 km. west from Butwal to Banbass. Thus, by the end of the Third Plan period, nearly 50 per cent of the 1040 km. East-West Highway will be completed. 
Raxaul-Kathmandu-Kodari Road 
The Kathmandu-Kodari road upon its completion during the Third Plan will link the capital city of Kathmandu with Kodari, a town on the Chinese border. Kathmandu is already linked with Raxaul on the Indian border including Raxaul to Amlekgang 39 km. and Hetauda to Bhainse 19 km. Further improvements will be made of 5.8 km during the Third Plan, particularly in the Raxual-Bahinse sector. By the end of the period an all-weather road will connect Kathmandu with the Indian border (and railhead) to the south and the Chinese border to the north. 
Sunauli-Pokhara 
       A traditional trade rout e for foot- traffic exists in west-central Nepal, connecting the towns of Bhairawa 
in the south (near an Indian railhead) with Botwal, Tansen, Pokhara and other trade areas in the hills. The Pokhara-Sunali road, now under construction, will connect these points so that modern transport can be used. This road, 205 km. long, will be completed during the Third Plan. 
Kathmandu=Pokhara 
A road now exists connecting Kathmandu with Trisuli, 69 km. to the northwest. This road will be made an all-weather road during the Third Plan. It will also be extended, on a fair-weather basis, west to Pokhara, thus connecting two major hill communities directly by a road through the hills . 
Mahendranagar-Doti 
To relieve the isolation of several far-western districts, a fair-weather track will be constructed between Mahendranagar and Doti. Total length will be approximately 240 km. and will be completed during the Third Plan. 
Construction and Improvement of Local Bridges and Roads 
Construction of new roads will not be of lasting significance unless a proper system of repair and maintenance is established. Therefore, during the Third Plan emphasis will be given to maintenance and further improvement of roads and bridges, both new and existing, so that the roads system as a whole will be maintained for heavy use. 
Construction and Improvement of Local Bridges and Roads. 
Construction of new roads will not be of lasting significance unless a proper system of repair and maintenance is established. Therefore, during the Third Plan emphasis will be given to maintenance and further improvement of roads and bridges, both new and existing, so that the roads system as a whole will be maintained for heavy use. 
Construction of Suspension Bridges 
Several rivers of Nepal flowing from north to south either have no bridges at important crossing or have bridges usable only in the dry season. Because much foot -traffic must cross these rivers, suspension bridges are needed at many points. Therefore, 15 bridges will be constructed during the Third Plan. 
 
Aid to Panchayat for the Construction of Local Roads 
The Roads Department will provide financial and technical assistance to different village and district panchayats to help them build local road. For the most part, local resources will construct these roads, but governmental aid will be of great importance in providing proper technical guidance and in supplying construction items not available locally. 
Miscellaneous 
During this Plan period, a material laboratory will be established to study and test construction materials. The laboratory will also make the results of its research available to concerned departments. Several buildings for divisional offices of the Road Department will be constructed in different parts of the country. This will enable them to supervise the construction of new roads and the repairs and maintenance of roads in the several divisions more efficiently. His Majesty’s Government has created a new division under the Roads Department to work out future plans and to conduct surveys for road construction in various parts Nepal. Such activities will be expanded during the Plan period. 
 
Provision for Vehicles 
Mere construction of roads is not enough in Nepal. Proper utilization of roads is also required. As the Government has to concentrate its efforts on construction, the policy is for automobile and most of the truck and bus services to be provided by private individuals and companies. Investments, particularly in trucks and buses, will be encouraged through existing financial institutions. 
 
Air Transport 
 
It will take considerable time and resources to develop roads in Nepal. Air transport therefore, will remain important as a means of providing access to the hill areas of Nepal. 
Progress to Date 
 
Before the launching of the First Five Year Plan, air services were available only in five places: Kathmandu, Pokhara, Bhairawa, Simra and Birtnagar. These airports were all fair-weather strips accept in Kathmandu. 
During the First Plan period the following fair-weather airfields were constructed to provide additional services: 
 
Upon completion of the First Plan, Nepal could provide air facilities in 12 places in the country. In addition, the Royal Nepal Airlines Corporation was established to provide regular air services. Improvements on the Kathmandu, Biratnagar and Bhairawa airfields were made. 
 
Considerable headway was made in the construction of airports during the Second Plan: short –take -off and landing (STOL) airstrips were3 completed in B.aglung, Jumla and Jiri, and a 1,524 meter fair-weather airfield in Jhapa District. Steps were taken to improve facilities at Bahirawa and Biratnagar and bring them up to all-weather standards. A 3,300 ft. cross-runway in Kathmandu was planned and construction begun if Kathmandu. 
Program under the Third Plan 
 
The result of the survey team of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, submitted in September, 1964, classified air facilities in Nepal into three groups: 
Measures will be taken to develop these 15 airfields of which 8 are all weather, 4 pair-weather, and 3 interim fields. 
During the Third Plan period, the airfields at Biratnagar, Nepalgunj and Tumlingetar will be made all- weather fields and brought up to the standard required of the permanent classifying above. By the end of the Plan, six out of eight permanent airfields will be of all-weather standard. Of the remaining two airports, surveys and construction work will be completed at Doti airfield. As the present Pokhara airfield is not properly located for use by large planes, plans will be developed to construct a new strip about 4 miles east of the present one. Construction of the Gaucher cross-runway will be completed by the end of the first year of the Plan. 
Since Gaucher Airport is the most important airfields in Nepal. Attempt must be made to make it s modern one. A master plan for development and modernization will be prepared by consulting firm and work begun to turn the prese4nt Gaucher Airport into a modern international. A new terminal building, two hangers, a car parking lot and a new road leading to the airport are all under construction and will be completed early in the Third Plan. 
At other airports, Bharatpur, Dang, Gorkha and Dhangadhi, terminal buildings, staff quarters and other facilities will be constructed to bring the entire air transport system of Nepal up to as high a standard as resources and experience will permit. 
Construction of 20 small airstrips will be undertaken in the hilly regions of Nepal where large planes cannot land. The Panchayat Department will provide assistance to local panchayats in constructing such strips. In the First year of the Plan, steps will be taken to locate suitable places and acquire land. Four strips will be constructed in the second year and another 16 by the end of the Plan period. This will provide needed transport facilities in the hill areas and make it possible to step up the rate of development considerably. 
The Civil Aviation Department will be strengthened and improved. Its responsibilities include the construction and maintenance of all the airfields in the country and the operation of the air communication system. 
       The Royal Nepal Airlines Corporation (RNAC) will be provided both technical and financial assistance 
to strengthen the organization and to make air service more effective and efficient. Depending upon the traffic and financial support available, form one to three new faster planes will be purchased for external flights. Present Dakota planes will continue to be used for internal flights. Repair and maintenance facilities will be expanded and improved. 
Training for RNAC staff will be conducted in Nepal and both flight and service personnel will be sent abroad for advanced training. A new central office will construct for the airline. Twelve staffs quarter and storage facilities for fuel, spare parts and equipment will be located at various airports. New buses for passengers will be provided in Calcutta. Patna, New Delhi, Simra, Biratnagaar, Bhairawa and Kathmandu. 
Railway Transport 
 
In India railways occupy a prominent place in transportation services. In Nepal, however, it is very difficult to construct railway: only two lines exist at present. One runs from Raxaul to Amlikhgunj, a distance of 29 miles. The other links Jayanagar to Janakpur. Both link points in Nepal to Indian railheads. Although the Raxaul- Amlikhgunj line was of considerable importance when first constructed in 1927, traffic on the Raxaul-Kathmandu road opened in 1956 has reduced its significance in the transport system. 
 
Programme in the Third Plan 
 
Construction of Railway Terminal in Birgunj: Goods coming from the Indian meter-gauge railway at 
Raxaul are unloaded before being shifted to the Raxaul-Amlikhgunj railway or to trucks for transport to various points in Nepal. The Nepalese customs checkpoint is at Birgunj just across the border from Raxaul. Much confusion, revenue loss and damage to goods now occur because of the repeated loading and unloaded easily. Custom facilities will also be constructed near the present Nepalese railway station. 
N.F.F.R.: As there is no proramme to construct roads from Jayanagar to Janakpur are present, the 
railroad connecting these points is expected to continue to carry considerable freight and passengers. Plans will be development to improve existing facilities and possibly to extend the line to Chissapani. 
Ropeway: In view of the hilly topography of the country and the relative cheapness of ropeway 
transportation, the ropeways, can become an important means of transport. The Kathmandu-Hetauda ropeway had demonstrated the economic benefits of ropeway. However, in the absence of detailed surveys it is not possible to determine the economically beneficial sites for the ropeways. Therefore, in this plan, programmes have been made for surveys. Once the sites are determined, construction can be undertaken later. 
 
 
National Transport Organization 
 
Recently a National transport organization has been established to maximize the utilization of the transport resources of the country. The principle objective of the organization is to effectively coordinate the ropeway, railway and other means of transportation in the Bagmati and Narayani zones. Moreover, the Organization will provide facilities and guidance to different transport organization in the private sector. 
 

CHAPTER XXI 
Communications 
 
Transportation and communication facilities are inadequate in Nepal. The importance of these vit al factors in the time of national awakening cannot be overstressed. As governmental and commercial decentralization increase throughout the country, there must be effective communication links between the center and the district. This is essential not only for the districts by smooth running of administration and proper guidance to the district by the center, but also for public and private business communications as well. 
Postal Services 
 
The first postal service was begun in 1875. About 100 post offices were then established. Thee main objective was internal administration and national security. Just prior to the first Plan the number of post offices had risen to only 124. During the First Plan Nepal acquired membership in the International Postal Union. 
In the Three Year Plan period, emphasis was lid on consolidation of the existing postal system. The General Post Office the center was expanded and seven Zonal Post Officers were established to supervise and control the postal services between zones. Now there are 4 City Post Officers, 9 Central Post Officers and 153 Branch Post Offices in the country. In addition, there are three Post Offices, which is now responsible for foreign postal services. There are three mail routes (1) Western Hill Route; (2) Eastern Hill Route; (3) eastern Hill route. These routes are connected to branch lines. Internal letter insurance and internal parcel insurance and internal parcel insurance services have been recently started. 
In order to utilize the facilities available under the International Postal Union, Nepal has reached agreements with India and China and is negotiating with Pakistan, the United States and the United Kingdom. 
Third Plan 
The number of post offices is insufficient for present needs. Therefore, the post offices will be increased and existing officers expanded and improved. The organization of the postal system will be modified and other steps taken to improve efficiency and service. Highlights of the program are as following: 
Organization: An effective administrative system is the precondition for an expansion of postal 
services. To achieve a greater degree of specialization, the total postal system will be subdivided into administrative postal services categories. Seven more Supervisory Post Offices at zonal level will be establishing. At the district 28 Superintending Offices will be established which will work as a link between the Zonal Supervisory Office and the operating offices. 
Branch Post Offices: According to the Postal Survey Reports prepared during the Second Plan, there 
should be one Post Office to cover an area to 110 square miles. Therefore, 130 more post offices will be required. Of these, 85 will be established in the Third Plan period. in deciding upon the location of these new post offices, area and population to be served and existing postal facilities will be taken into account. 
Cooperative Post Offices: The first Cooperative post offices was established in 1957 and increased to 
150 by 1961. These were started as an experiment to meet the need for postal service and to develop a sense of cooperation as well. Although many of them were closed due to lack of cooperation and inadequate inspection and guidance from the Department, the results justify und further expansion. The target for the Third Plan will be to establish 400 more Cooperative Post Offices. These will be run by village panchayats with the assistance of the Postal Department. 
Extension of Postal Routs: In order to make postal services effective, a survey to determine the location 
of 20 new postal routs will be carried out. Existing routes will also be studied and necessary changes will be made. 
Surface and Air Mail: In order to utilize new highway facilities, mail vans will be put use as rapidly as 
the highway network is expanded— e.g. mail vans will soon ply the Kathmandu-Kodari road and portions of the 
East-West Highway, Air mail services will be extended to remote areas of Nepal as soon as plane service is extended. 
Inspections of Mail Services: The people are the ultimate sufferers from theft and careless handling of 
mail. Faith in the reliability of the postal services diminishes. To do away with these shortcomings, postal inspectors will be trained and a postal inspection service established. These inspectors will be posted at first in Kathmandu and the number will then be increased to cover different parts of the country. 
Money Orders: Money order service is only possible it inspection of mail is effective. The operation of a 
money order services will thus be undertaken in the second year of the Plan, after the mail inspection program has been implemented. 
Philatelic Scheme: This scheme will be made more effective in order to get maximum advantage for the 
sale of postage stamps. A variety of postage stamps in attractive design will be printed so as to increase income. 
Telecommunication 
Use of telephone and wireless service was limited to a few districts of Nepal at the beginning of the first Plan. Some 300 line were operating in Kathnamdu. During the First Plan, a modern automatic system with a capacity of 3,000 lines was installed in Kathmandu. There were all in use within a short period. 
Shortly after World War II, wireless sets were installed were installed in 28 districts. These were replaced by new sets in 35 district beginning in the latter part of the First Plan. 
Three Year Plan Progress 
In the field of wireless installation, seven zonal area control stations were established, and 50 wireless cenrters under these control stations were also installed. An international telecommunication system was completed with two circuits linking from Kathmandu, Delhi and Calcutta. With the establishment of two teleprinter centers, prompt communication of news from foreign countries has become possible 
The existing 1,000 telephone lines at Kathmandu have proved insufficient, and steps have been taken to add some 4,000 more lines. Installation of a 300 lines system with a local exchange at Biratnagar has been completed and will start functioning during the first year of the Third Plan period. The Nepal-Pak telecommunication project is nearing completion and will start functioning at the beginning of the Third Plan. 
The Program in the Third Plan 
The following telecommunication projects will be carried out during the Third Plan: 
Completion of Present Schemes: Installation of an additional 4,000 lines in Kathmandu, plus a 600 lines 
exchange at Patan will be finished. Installation of can additional 300 lines in the Singha Durbar Secretariat will also be completed. Installation of the 300 lines system at Biratnagar will be finished during the first year. 
East-West micro Wave: The present telephone system within Nepal extends eastward from Kathmandu 
through Dhankuta, Jaleshwor and Janakpur to Biratnagar and westward to Plapa. This line is old and not properly functioning. Hence, this will be replaced by micro -wave system. This system will be capable of carrying messages continuously through hundreds of chan nels and will not be affected by the monsoon. Fifty per cent of the total project will be completed during the Third Plan and the remainder will be carried over to the next plan. 
Trunk Call Service: The following services will be established under this scheme: 
1. 	The telephone service between the towns in India and Kathmandu will be operated through as 8-channel carrier system. There will be a direct contact between Kathmandu and Patan through one of these channels. The other channels will be used to maintain contact with other towns. 
2. 	There will be five circuits between Kathmandu and Birgunj. A direct link from Kathmandu to Hetauda, and Hetauda to Birgunj will be established as separate circuit. Under this system, direct contact between Hetauda and Bhainse, Hetauda and Amlekhgunj, and Birgunj and Simra will be possible. Of these five circuits, one circuit will be specifically used to contact Palung-Hetauda vicinity from Kathmandu. 
Telegraph System: A Six-channel V.T.T. telegraph system will be established to communicate masses 
from Kathamdnu to India and various other centers. A three-circuit telegraph line from Kathmandu will be extended to Birgunj through Bahainse, Hetauda, Amlekhgunj and Simra. 
 
Six English script teleprinter sets will be installed at Kathmandu for receiving news from India. Further, there will be four teleprinter sets for news service between Kathmandu and Birgunj. These English script teleprinter sets will be replaced by Nepali script teleprinters in the future 
Telephone Exchange: In Birgunj, a 300 lines automatic exchange and a trunk exchange services will be 
established. There will be four direct lines, and two booking and inquiry lines. For the trunk call service between Kathmandu and other districts of the country, a trunk exchange service having four enquiries and booking lines will be established. The international trunk exchange will also be started at Kathmandu. Public call centers with ten magneto board systems will be established in Palung, Bhainse, Hetauda, Amlekhgunj and Simra. 
 

CHAPTER XXII 
Education 
 
Education plays an important role in the field of social economic development. Technical and Adminis trative knowledge required for the creation of a modern society is obtained from an education that is in keeping with the need of the times. In addition, education is vital for the promotion of the intellectual and physical personality of the people. An educated peasant, aware of the needs of reform in agriculture, will be enthusiastic to adopt modern methods cultivation. 
Significant progress has been achieved in education over the last few years. However, Nepal still lags far behind in this field in comparison with other countries of the world. It is imperative, therefore, to step up the efforts in educational development in the coming years. But such efforts should be preceded by a careful consideration of several factors, particularly the storage of financial resources and technical know-how. In order to attain maximum benefit from the scarce resources, a well coordinated ant comprehensive education programme should be formulated. Development of education calls for an adequate supply of trained teachers as well as education materials, which will take a long time to be fulfilled. The number of primary schools can be increased only in proportion to the teachers trained in the normal schools. Since primary and secondary education programmes have to be developed in a coordinated way, the expansion of primary education will determine the provision to be made for secondary education. 
Following the Karachi Plan 1962-63, His Majesty’s Government has adopted the policy of providing primary school facilities to all boys and girls by 1980. Development of secondary and higher education should be carefully, considered, bearing in mind the expansion of primary education and the growing need for educated manpower. The objectives for education in The Third Plan period are as follows: 
1. 	To provide education to 40 percent of the boys and girls from six to eleven years of age and to expand the teachers’ training programme in the same proportion. 
2. 	To develop secondary and vocational education in accordance with the need for skilled and semi-skilled personnel. 
3. 	To raise the standard of teaching in secondary and higher educational institutions. 
4. 	To supply books and other education materials as required by the educational institutions. 
5. 	To make necessary improvements in the work the Education Ministry concerning statistics and programming in order to create a sound base for the formulation of education development programmes in the future. 
Education Development Programme 
Based on the above policy guidelines and objectives the following programme for education at different levels has been proposed in this plan period. 
Primary Education 
Progress made during the last few years in primary education is encouraging. By the end of the second Plan, 27 per cent of the children of school going age received some primary education, compared to 0.7 percent in 1949-50 and 15.3 percent in 1961-62. There is still much to be done to set up a sound system and to raise the standard of education. At present for example, thee number of fifth year students is less than 10 per cent of the first year students. It is due partly to the fact that there are 300 one-teacher schools where students cannot pursue their studies further than the 1st and 2nd classes. Hence over half of the primary school students do not go beyond the first class. An education of this kind is costly and of limited benefits hence a misuse of the country’s scarce resources. 
       It is therefore necessary that the number of classes be increased in existing schools so that students do 
not encounter a dead end. Primary schools must also be extended to more areas. The target under the Third Plan will be to provide education to 40 per cent of the children of school age. In order to fulfill the demand for teachers in the primary schools, 5,000 teachers will be trained with the extension of the teach training programme. In 
addition, further training will be given to teachers now saving in 3,000 primaries schools. Increased assistance will be extended to schools for the construction of new buildings to increase the number of classes. In this programme, priority will be given to those schools that provide free and compulsory education. 
In order to make text -books available for the primary schools, sixteen books will be published and distributed. Management of schools will be decentralized in those districts where it is found appropriate. Grants given by His Majesty’s Government to the primary schools will be gradually reduced so as to the schools locally self-sufficient. 
Secondary Education 
The programme in secondary education exceeded the targets set for it in the Second Plan, but it is not keeping pace with the programme in primary education. Special effort will be made in this plan to coordinate the programmes in the two fields. In addition, improvement in the quality of secondary education is necessary. For example, the percentage of students passing the examination given at the end of secondary training and receiving their School Leaving Certificate (S.C.L.) is very low. Attention will be given to this point during this Plan period. 
During the Third Plan, the enrolment of secondary school students will be increased from 40,000 to 68,000 by upgrading 115 primary schools into middle schools and 36 middle schools into high schools. Under this programme 1,000 secondary school teachers will be trained. Provision for the required education materials will also be made. Hostel facilities will be provided to the students coming from distant places. Special studies will be undertaken in different high schools to evaluate the effects of the various steps taken under the education development programme and seminars of supervisors and teachers will be organized. 
Vocational Education 
The aim of the vocational education program is to combine occupational and general knowledge. To achieve this objective, high schools have been converted into multi-purpose schools to provide, in addition to the basic curriculum, vocational training in agriculture, industries etc. During the Second Plan period, 16 agriculture secondary schools were converted into multi-purpose schools and training has been given in four subjects: agriculture, home science, commerce and secretarial skills. In addition, construction of a technical institute and a demonstration multi-purpose high school with capacities of 600 and 500 students respectively was begun. Every year 100 vocational teachers are given 8 weeks’ in -service training. 
During the Third Plan period, teaching in the technical institute and the demonstration multi-purpose school will be started. By 1970-71 it is proposed to open both of these educational institutions at full capacity. A hostel accommodation 250 students for the technical institute and another for 100 students at the demonstration school will be constructed. 
In the present 16 multi-purpose schools, the number of vocational classes will be increased from 120 to 320 and thus 5,000 students will receive multi-purpose education. Ten more high schools will be converted into multi-purpose school to provide vocational training for another 2,500 students. At the zonal level three vocational school buildings and hostels will be constructed. More than 60 workshops will be arranged over the country and guidance and supervision will be given the multi-purpose and vocational schools. 
Adult Education 
Under the adult education programme initiated in 1956-57 it is established that about 100,000 adults were made literate by 1965-66. During this Plan period an additional 100,000 adults will be made literature. Moreover, a regular evaluation of this adult education programme will be made and contact maintained with the trained adults in order to keep the students in touch with what they have learned. 
Education Materials 
Significant progress has been made in the production and distribution of education materials as a result of steps taken in accordance with the recommendation made by the National Education Planning commission in 1954-55. It is evident however that education materials required in the future will be grown rapidly as the number of students increases and the quality of education improves. Therefore, the programme for the production of education materials will be expanded according to need: 75 new books will be prepared and published— some for use by students as texts and others by teachers by as reference. In addition to the three quarterly magazines now being published. Two other quarterlies will be started. Records, charts, pictures and other teaching materials in Nepali and English will be made available in increased quantities. A Nepalese dictionary of scientific and technical terms will be prepared with the help of the Royal Nepal academy. 
Higher Education 
       There has been rapid growth of higher education since 1954-55, but little improvement has been made in 
the organization and management of colleges. At present these are 29 Arts and Science Colleges in 11 of the 14 zones. Fourteen of these colleges are centered in the Bagamti zone alone. In 18 colleges, however, number of students is less than 100. Only five colleges have more than 300 students. The curriculum is very weak in many instances. It is evident from these facts that a special effort should be made to raise the standard education and that improvement in the organization of the colleges and in the curriculum must receive first attention. 
 
In this Plan the higher education programme has been divided into four parts: (1) Collage
improvement,(2) Secondary school teacher training, (3) Primary school teacher and (4) Tribhuwan University. 
College Improvement Programme 
Under this programme, honors classes will be organized in some subjects at Tri-Chandra College and necessary facilities will be made available for this purpose. The library of the Tri-Chandra College will be expended. An examination hall will also be constructed. In addition, other colleges will be given assistance for building construction. 
Secondary School Teachers’ Training 
At present about 2,200 teachers are teaching in the secondary schools, of which adequately trained teachers’ number only 100. This is mainly because only a few of the persons trained in the College of Education work as teachers after graduation. It is, therefore, necessary to make provision for the employment of the trained persons as teachers along with an increase in the capacity of the teacher-training institutions. In this Plan period, new teacher training collages will be set up by providing one year and two year B. Ed. Course. In addition, a Master of Education degree programme will be initiated at Tribhuwan University. High classes will be held for teachers already on the job. Great stress will be laid on teaching methods in workshops to be conducted twice every year. Necessary steps will be taken to make the teaching profession attractive for the trained persons. 
Primary School Teacher Training 
The main objective of the primary school teachers training programme is to train teachers for the primary schools, and to bring about uniformity in t he teaching methods and curriculum of the primary schools. Under this programme 4,500 teachers have been trained since 1954-55 in seven normal schools now functioning in Kathmandu, Birgunj, Dharan, Illam, Pokhara, Palpa and Salyan. During the Third Plan Period, a new normal school will be established at Dandeldhura and hostels will be built at Birgunj, Dharan, Illam and Palpa. During the vacation period normal school workshops will be organized where the curriculum will be revised and revised as necessary. 
Tribhuwan University 
Under the building construction programme as envisaged in the Second Plan, a chemistry department building, a student hostel, staff quarters and a memorial hall have been completed. The College of Education buildings and a library are under construction. Another objective in the Second Plan was to increase the number of Nepalese lectures in the University. Satisfactory progress has been made in this field as well. 
During the current Plan period, expansion will be made in the facilities of the Arts, Science and Commerce collages. In particular, special effort will be made to initiate higher studies in Chemistry, Biology, Botany and Physics. As mentioned above, Master of Education classes will also be started. Construction of buildings for the Physics Department and two hostels will be completed soon in order to open classes for the M. S. degree in Chemistry, Physics, Biology and Botany. By the end of the Plan period, construction of an Arts College building, staff quarters and office buildings will be completed. In addition necessary provision will be made for a gymnasium, a playground, water, electricity and roads on the campus. Master plan for the development of Kirtipur Campus will also be prepared. The present educational system and the curriculum will be reviewed and necessary revisions will be made. 
 

CHAPTER XXIII 
Health 
 
As in other fields, Nepal lags far behind in health services. A number of development projects have been undertaken during the First and Second Plan periods, but a well-organized health service is still lacking. A large number of people still fall victim cholera, small-pox, tuberculosis and malaria. As a result, the average life expectancy of a Nepalese is 32 years, whereas in India, Pakistan and Japan it is 45, 45 and 70 respectively. The annual death rate is Nepal 21 per thousand and infant mortality is 244 per thousand. In order to increase the average life expectancy of the people, improve their health and enlist their active participation in development, malaria must be eradicated from the area where 4,500,000 people live and covering 40160.0 kilometers. The country must be freed from the menace of tuberculosis, small-pox, leprosy and other diseases. 
Programme in the Previous Plans 
During the First Plan period, hospitals with capacity totaling 149 beds were constructed and 79 health centres established. In the second Plan three more hospitals and 8 health centres were added, bringing the total number of hospital beds to 1,156. Malaria eradication work has been completed in the Central Zone and it is under way in the Eastern Zone. In Kathmandu 450,000 people have been inoculated against small-pox and a survey of leprosy has been completed. 
Third Plan 
Under the present circumstances, it will inevitably take sometime to development a satisfactory programme in the health services of the country. Financial resources are not the only hurdle to overcome. Lack of administrative and technical personnel is an equally important limitation in this field. In order to make any headway, the number of doctors, nurses and other personnel has to be increased. But training these personnel takes time. Hence the limited financial resources of the country have to be used in the best possible way. Keeping in view the short as well as the long term need for health service, the health services programme of this Plan is divided into three parts: (1) preventive measures, (2) hospital services and (3) training. (1) 
Preventive Measures 
Great emphasis is given to preventive measures. Thee programme for the Third Plan will be as follows: 
Malaria Eradication: In the central zonal, D.D.T Spraying work has been in progress since 1960, and 
the survey work will be continued. In fiscal 1065-66, survey work will be completed; in 1966-67, under the consolidation phase, malaria insects will be widely investigated. If all goes well, in the final year of the Third Plan, the maintenance phase will be started in the central zone. 
In the eastern zone D.D.T. spraying work will be continued up to the fourth year of the Third Plan and the consolidation phase will be initiated in the final year. 
In the western zone, D.D.T. will be sprayed from the first year of the Plan and survey work will started in selected areas beginning in the third year. In some areas consolidation phase will be entered in the final year. The Consolidation phase in this zone well not be completed, however, until the middle of the fourth plan. 
Eradication of Small-Pox: Small-pox eradication work on a pilot project basis was initiated in the 
country in 1962-63 with the help of the World Health Organization (W.H.O). Within the Third Plan period, the inhabitants of Kathmandu and other districts will be inoculated against small-pox 
Eradication of Tuberculosis: A tuberculosis eradication pilot project was initiated recently with the 
help of W.H.O and UNICEF. Under this programme the procedure is to find and treat tuberculosis cases. This programme will be undertaken in Kathmandu for the first three years of the Plan. In the last two years it will be extended to Morang and Parsa districts. 
Leprosy Control and Survey: This pilot project was started in Kathmandu in 1962-63 in order to identify 
the victims of leprosy, to treat them and to set up leprosy control centres. At present, this work is carried out at Pachali Clinic, Khokana Leprosarium and four other clinics. Two additional clinics and an ambulatory unit will be established. A leprosarium will also be constructed. 
Skin and Venereal Disease Control: As the present Pachali Clinic for skin and venereal disease in not 
up-to-date, a new building will be constructed, and in Bir Hospital, a dermatological ward of 10 beds will be opened to treat persons suffering from these diseases. 
Hospital Services 
During the Third Plan, 12 health centres will be upgraded and converted to hospitals adding 475 hospital beds. In addition, 32 health centres will be provided with modern facilities and equipment and 103 health posts will be established. Further more, 8 zonal offices will be opened to strengthen the health services. Details of the programme are as follows: 
Hospitals: In order to raise the level of health services the Department of Health will convert 58 existing 
hospitals and the Hetauda health centre into 25-bed hospitals. Seven more district hospitals and 11 health centres will be converted into 15-beds hospitals. 
Heath Centres: During the plan, 32 health centers will be provided with doctors and necessary 
equipment. These health centres will be divided into tow groups. Each group will consist of 16 health centres. Both of these groups will be provided with doctors except that the first group will also have lady doctors. The second group will have assistance nurse midwives instead of lady doctors. 
Health Posts: During the Plan period 103 health posts will be established. These will be under the 
control of the district health organization with 3 to 5 health posts in each district where they are established. Each health post will have 3 to 6 mobile teams to cover assigned area of the district. 
Zonal Offices: During this Plan period, 8 new zonal offices will be established, which will be helpful in 
the supervision of local health units. There will be hospitals with 50 or 25 beds under these zonal offices. 
Training Programme 
In order to implement successfully the health services programme by making available trained personnel the following training programme have been incorporated in this Plan: 
Nurse Training: Under this programme the construction of a Nurses’ Training School in the Bir Hospital 
compound will be completed. Hostel facilities will be provided to the nurse trainees and the annual intake of trainees will be increased from 30 to 40. 
Auxiliary Health Workers Training: This Plan aims art training 60 auxiliary health workers every year, 
for which adequate provision of buildings and hostel facilities will be made. In order to make the programme effective, training will also be given to persons working in the malaria eradication department and they will be reassigned. The will become possible as the malaria programme nears the maintenance phase. 
Training of Assistant Nurses and Midwives: As the Bharatpur centre alone cannot meet the country’s 
demand for assistant nurses and midwives, new training centre will be opened in the Plan period at Birtnagar and Nepalgunj. Forty additional assistant nurses and midwives will be trained in these centres every year. 
Medical College: at present, about fifteen persons are sent abroad for medical training each year. Of 
these, about 10 return as qualified doctors. At present, there are only two hundred doctors in Nepal. The ratio 
between doctors and population is 1 to 50,000. We have to train at least 100 doctors every year for the next several years in order to lower the ratio to 10,000. To provide a part of this training, a medical college will be established to start functioning within the Plan period. 
Because a medical college must have adequate associated hospital facilities, the present strength of the hospitals in Kathmandu will be increased to five hundred beds. 
Miscellaneous 
Family Planning: It is felt that the population of Nepal will grow at a faster rate as assured of the public 
health measures. Thus it will not be possible to increase the standard of living of the people unless the birth rate is checked. To do so, positive steps must be taken in the field of family planning. 
In this Plan period, four family planning clinics, two in Kathmandu and one each in Patan and Bhaktapur, will start functioning under the family planning branch of the Directorate of Health Services. Family planning education will be conducted and family planning devices distributed on a limited scale. If the programme proves successful, it will be extended to other areas. 
Public Health laboratory: The construction of the Public Health Laboratory building, which was 
started under the Three Year Plan, will be completed within this Plan period. This laboratory will be concerned with pathological epidemiological, bacteriological and infectious diseases, and it will analyze water and food materials. 
Ayurvedic System: As regards Ayurved, the present Ayurved College and Ayurved Hospital of 
Kathmandu will be expanded so as to make available more training facilities. The Ayurvedic dispensary will also be reorganized and renovated. There will improved reorganized coordination between the hospital and the college. 
 
CHAPTER XXIV 
Drinking Water And Sewage 
 
Two things are necessary to create a healthy physical environment: (a) a supply of pure water in adequate quantity and (b) a sanitary sewage disposal system. It is necessary, therefore, to give emphasis to these works and a master plan for the supply of drinking water should be formulated from a long-term viewpoint. Such a master plan for the Kathmandu Valley is under preparation by joint efforts of His Majesty’s Government and then World health Organization. 
Third Plan 
Drinking Water: During the Third Plan period drinking water supply system will be developed in all of 
the important urban areas. Priority will be given to the areas without easy access to drinking water. The schemes incorporated in this Plan are as follows: 
Kathmandu: At present 8,182,800 litres of water per day are supplied to Kathmandu from the balaju and 
Maharajgunj reservoirs for a population ot 180,000. The distribution system is in poor condition. A scheme to 
increase the water supply by 32,000,000 gallons per day is under way. This scheme will be completed in the First year of the plan period, and will meet the requirements for the coming ten years. Fifty years from now, it is estimated that 9,000,000 gallons of water per day will be required. It appears from existing hydrological data those 15,000,000 gallons of water per day can be supplied from the Bagamti, Sialmati and Nagmati rivers. A master plan will therefore be framed to develop this long-term scheme. 
Lalitpur: Lalitpur with a population of 49,000 is the second largest town of Nepal. Only 400,000 gallons 
of drinking water per day are presently available against a need of 1,000,000 gallons per day. A scheme to supply 3,500,000 gallons of drinking water per day will be implemented during this plan 
Bhaktapur: Bhaktapur, with 34,400 populations, is the third largest town on Nepal. This present supply 
of drinking water is 120,000 gallons per day. During this Plan period 1,140,000 gallons per day will be supplied to Bhaktpur. 
Birgunj: Birgunj has a population of 15,000. During the second Plan construction work was started on a 
scheme too supply 400,000 gallon per day. Construction will be completed in the near future. 
Pokhara: During the Second Plan a water supply scheme was initiated in Pokhara which has a 
population of 30,000. When completed this project will supply 600,000 gallons per day. 
Kirtipur: At present 30,000 gallons of water per day are supplied to Kirtipur with a population of 8,000. 
With the completion of the proposed scheme in Latipur, 400,000 gallons of water per day will be supplied to kirtupur, Panga and the Tribhuwan University Campus. 
Thimi: Water supply at Thimi, Bodey, and Nagadesh is from tube-wells. A new scheme has become 
necessary as there is excess iron content in the tube-well water. 
Rajbiraj: no water supply scheme has been provided for Rajbiraj with a population of 12,000. The main 
sources of drinking water are the rivers and some hand pumps. During this plan period 300,000 gallons per day will be supplied to Rajbiraj by a project now under preparation. 
Nepalgun: Population is increasing rapidly in Nepalgunj which is inhabited now by 10,000 people. The 
present water supply is 5,000 gallons per day. A scheme to supply 28,000 gallons per day is underway and will be completed during this Plan period. 
Janakpurt: Janakpur with a population of 8,000 is still dependent for its water supply on a distant river 
and a few hand pumps. A scheme to supply 360,000 gallons per day will be completed during this Plan period. 
Bhairawa: At present Bairhawa with a population of 7,500 depends for its water supply on a river and 
some hand pumps. A scheme to supply 150,000 gallons per day is underway and will be completed soon. 
Bhadrapur: Bhadrapur with a population of 6,000 is devoid of a modern water supply scheme. It has to 
depend on river water. Investigation is underway in order to provide 140,000 gallons of water per day. Construction work will be completed during this Plan Period. 
Dhangdi: During this Plan 150,000 gallons per day will be supplied to Dhangadi with a population of 
6,400, which is in acute shortage of drinking water. 
Banepa: The existing water supply system which was set up 25 years ago will be improved in order to 
make available an additional 40,00 gallons per day. 
Dang: Hand pumps are the only source of drinking water for 4,200 inhabitants of Dang. A scheme will be 
implemented to supply 35,000 gallons per day. 
Koilabas: During this Plan period a scheme will be implemented to supply 75,000 gallons of drinking 
water per day in order to meet the present requirement. 
Terai and Hill areas: It is essential to make provision o\for drinking water in some villages to Terai and 
the hills which are urgently in need of it. Under this scheme 35,000 gallons per day will be made available in different place to be selected later. 
Sewage Construction: at present, the only sewage system in Nepal of any consequence exists in some 
areas of Kathmandu. In the absence of a modern sewage system, disease epidemics frequently occur. It is therefore essential to develop a sanitary sewage along with the provision of drinking water. 
With the assistance of the World Health Organization, preliminary work has been started to formulate a master plan (Nepal. 14) for the provision of drinking water and a sewage system for the Kathmandu Valley. A detailed survey is necessary for the construction of a sewage system in Kathmandu as the next step. This program should be coordinated with the proposed master plan for the Kathmandu Valley. During this Plan period, the survey will be completed and construction sta rted. 
Experimental Village Sanitation Programme: This programme consists of both a water supply and a 
sewage disposal system. It will be started on an experimental basis in the three villages of Lalitpur, with the assistance of UNICEF. Under this programme a work shop will be established for the maintenance of the water supply system and necessary materials will be made available for the implementation of the schemes. 
 
Drinking Water Supply: In order to collect necessary information for the formulation of water supply 
schemes, surveys will be undertaken; this will be linked with the water resources discussed elsewhere. 
 

CHAPTER XXV 
Housing Programs 
 
At various cities in Nepal the problem of housing has become a severe one. Particularly in Kathmandu and Patan population is increasing of the rate of 2.2 per cent due to the mobility of people and the natural increase of population. The present population of Kathmandu and Patan is 171,000 whereas the number of houses at these two places is only 22,534. On the basis of one house required for one five-member family unit 34,200 houses are needed in Kathmandu and Patan alone, which means that an additional 11,686 houses are needed. 
In the first two plans, there was no provision for housing. Keeping in view the limited resources available and the preliminary nature of the work, the housing program will be launched on a limited scale during the Third Plan. Since 1950, a keen interest has been shown towards the construction of houses in the private sector. These new houses however, are designed especially for the purpose of renting to foreigners and the requirements of the common people have not been met. His Majesty’s Government has been advancing three years’ salary to the civil servants for the const ruction of houses as a further inducement; however, this amount is quite inadequate to cover construction costs, especially for middle class civil servants. 
Target of the Third Plan 
Housing 
His Majesty’s Government will provide necessary incentives to the private sector in order to construct 400 new houses in Kathmandu, particularly for the use of the middle and low income groups. 
In addition, 51.28 hectares of new plots of land will be acquired during the plan period. Utilities such as water, electricity, schools, roads etc., will be arranged on this land and plots will be sold to persons interested in constructing houses. It necessary, the land will also be sold on an installment basis. 
Town Planning 
In order to develop the city areas in Kathmandu Valley, a master plan of Kathmandu and Patan is under preparation. Master plan for neighboring cities will also be prepared during the plan period. On the basis of such plans, steps will be undertaken to improve the city area of the Kathamndu Valley. 
Building Construction 
       Since adequate facilities are not available for officers and the living quarter of government servants in 
the various districts, office buildings, living quarters for government servants, guest houses for tourists and inspection teams, jails, police officers etc., in various districts will be constructed. A laboratory will also be constructed during the plan period by the Building Department of HMG to test construction materials. 
 

CHAPTER XXVI 
Publicity, Broadcasting and Cultural Advancement 
 
In order to achieve success in a development plan the full cooperation of the public is necessary. Form this point’s view, the role of publicity and broadcasting agencies is quite important as media to bring to the notice of the public the policies 
Publicity 
The Publicity Department has been publishing booklets and photographic materials for general distribution. During the Third Plan period the aim is to modernize the existing program with the following improvements: 
Printing press 
A modern printing press will be set up to print government publications which are gradually increasing. A building will also be constructed in which to install the printing press. 
Zonal and Districts Publicity Centres 
With the development of the panchayat system and the decentralization of government functions, it is essential to make the publicity organization strong and to start publicity both at the zonal and district levels by distributing publications of carious kinds. There fore, in the Third Plan, these centres will be established and strengthened. 
Film Produc tion 
Documentary films from various aspect of Nepal are at present, being produced. During the Plan period the production and distribution of such films will be increased. 
Gorkhaptra 
        Gorkhapatra is a self-supporting body. Its publications include one daily and one weekly newspaper. As 
a part of the financial assistance to this body, one linotype machine and other press equipment will be made available to it during the Plan period. 
Broadcasting and Cultural Enhancement 
Construction of a new studio building was begins during the Second Plan to improve the broadcasting system. In addition, more than 200 listening centres have been set up during the same period. It is planned to expand the existing broadcasting net-work during the Third Plan. A new 100 kilowatt transmitter and two medium wave transmitters of 1 kilowatts wave will be installed in Kathmandu. When completed, it will be possible to broadcast the programmes of Radio Nepal, not only inside the country, but also only the whole of Asia. In addition, 8j00 receivers will beset up in local listening centres. Ultimately, there will be one listening centre for each village panchayat. 
Two zonal stations of 5 kw. Each will be established, one in eastern and one in western Nepal. These stations will broadcast programs which have local importance and thus, local interest. In order to develop the broadcasting system in the country, arrangement has been made to provide training to the staff of Radio Nepal in radio programming and related technical fields. Also an administrative building will be built for Radio Nepal during the Plan period. 
Steps will be taken to preserve Nepal’s cultural heritages in the form of music, dance, etc. One national hall for dancing with modern amenities will be constructed in Kathmandu. 
 

Chapter XXVII 
Statistics 
 
The first crude population census was taken in Nepal before the time of the first Rana Prime Minis ter, Jung Bahadur, more than a century ago. Since 1911, enumeration has been attempted at approximately ten years intervals. Nevertheless, it was not until 1952-1954 that the first population census was conducted along modern lines. Shortly thereafter, the need for various kinds of data for the development of the country was realized. The Department of Population Census was dissolved and the present Central Bureau of Statistics was formed in 1958 under the Nepal Statistics Act. 
In view of the limited resources and experience available in the country, the full use of trained manpower and available resources could not be mobilized in all of the fields of statistical study. The entire responsibility of the few trained personnel was utilized largely for census taking purpose. 
Over the past five years, however, the situation has begun to improve. A Census of Population was conducted in 1961 and a Census of Agriculture in 1962. The first estimate of national income of Nepal for the year 1961-62 was also completed. In the field of industrial data, a list of existing industries has been prepared and published. In 1965, the collection of industrial statistics will be started. Such data will make it possible to prepare more comprehensive national income data. 
Foreign Trade data covering the period 1955-1961 have already been published. The collection of data for the year 1962-63 is almost finished. In 1962, a data was compiled on the basis of declaration forms introduced in he same year. In addition, various, indexes and other miscellaneous data have also been collected and published. 
The Third Plan 
 
 
The main objective of this plan is to make basic data on Nepal available to individuals and organizations belonging in both the private and public sectors. Instead of merely collecting basic data on population, agriculture, industries, etc, an aim of the Plan is to publish information on industries and commerce which will help to determine the social as well as economic activities of the people. The following activities have been included in the Third Plan: 
Population Census 
The preliminary report of the 1961 Population Census has been published. The detailed report will be published in 1965. The next Census of Population will be conducted in 1971; hence preparatory steps will be taken between 1965 and 1970 
Agricultural Census 
The detailed report of the Agricultural Census of 1962 will be published. Sample surveys of crop production will be conducted each year and published. Similarly, livestock data will be collected on a sample basis from time to time. 
Industrial Survey 
With an aim of collecting data regarding industrial output and other related information in Nepal, an Industrial Survey will be conducted every year. This survey will also encompass small industries scattered throughout the country. 
Domestic Trade 
Since the present knowledge about domestic trade is very limited, a survey will be made to collect necessary data regarding important trade centres. 
Vital Statistics 
The collection of Vital Statistics will be started first in the major cities. Within the plan period, all cities in Nepal will be included. Later, this activity will be extended gradually to the whole country. 
Price Statistics 
The collection of price data and the calculation of price indexes for both the Terai and Kathmandu regions will be continued. More commodities and place will be covered to make it more comprehensive. 
Family Budget Survey 
The present family budget survey of certain area in Kathmandu will be gradually extended to cover Bhaktapur, Lalitput and some cities of the Terai as well. 
National Income 
Preliminary estimates of national income, prepared first for 1961-62, have also been prepared for 1954-65. During the plan period further improvements will be made in these estimates and additional data included on expenditures, savings and capital accumulation. 
Miscellaneous 
Statistics on foreign trade, aviation, railways, road transport and education will also be colle cted systematically and published. Administration of the Central Buresu will be reformed and improved. Modern equipment will be arranged to process the survey result quickly and efficiently. A new building will be provided to house staff and equipment. 
 

Chapter XXVIII 
Hydrological Survey 
 
In order to develop irrigation, drinking water and hydro-electric power, hydrological data are very essential. Collection of hydrological data for different rivers and streams was begun during the Second. A Hydrological Survey Department was set-up to collect this information and to develop forecasting statistics. 
Fifty-one gauging stations were installed on various rivers in Nepal. Three stations to record the volume of water established on the Karnali River. 
The Third Plan 
Gauging Stations 
During the Third Plan, 40 additional gauging stations will be established. Necessary data with regard to the volume of water flow in various major and small rivers of Nepal will be made available form these stations. In the future, these will facilities the determination of the power generating capacity of Nepal water resources. 
Ground Water 
Apart from the water flowing on the surface, the other main source of water for irrigation and drinking purposes in ground water. Nothing has been done in this direction so far. During the plan period, surveys will be made to determine the possibility of using ground water in the Kathmandu Valley and Terai Region. 
Quality Sampling 
Twenty surface water sampling station will be established to analyze the quality of water. Nineteen ground water sampling stations and 40 sediment sampling stations will also be established. 
Forecasting Station 
Seventy stations will be established to collect rainfall, temperature and other weather data. During the Plan period, weather forecasting will be introduced. 
Organization 
Four zonal level offices will be set up to supervise workers in various areas. One central laboratory will be established to analyze the quality an the volume of water. 
 

Chapter XXIX 
Administrative Reform 
The speed of economic development does not only on capital and labour, but also upon Government administrative capacity. Since His Majesty’s Government must bear a major responsibility for achieving rapid economic development of the nation, necessary improvements in the organization and operation of all aspects of government must be implemented. Administrative improvement was stressed in the Second Plan and, as a result, considerable progress was made. Training facilities have been made available at several levels of government service. New methods and techniques of administration were introduced. Better performance, particularly by staff at the lower levels, has been achieved. Many accountants serving in all ministries and departments were trained under the Accountant Training Programme in order to maintain accounts are accordance with up-to-date procedures. Now procedures in budgeting and fund releases were helpful in effective execution of developmental activities. 
In spite of these achievements, further changes in the administrative system are necessary for the successful implementation of the Third Plan and of subsequent plans. In view of the increasing volume of work in ministries and departments, the creation of new section and sub-sections and the appointment of new staff continuous improvement in administrative regulations and organization s administrative regulations and organization are required. As such, the study of departmental organization and recommendations for improvement various public sector industries must also be properly managed and guidance provided the private sector. The latter activities differ from the general activities of Government administrative: Thus study and analysis are necessary. In order to meet these diverse requirements, the following steps will be taken: 
Reform is General Administrative 
In the third Plan, the goal will be to create and effective and efficient administrative structure in the entire government. To achieve this target, heavy emphasis will be given to personnel improvement and revision of administrative policies and procedures. Specifically, the following steps will be taken: 
Pre-Service Training 
A pre-service training programme will be conducted for all the new employees of His Majesty’s Government, especially the inexperienced employees’ recruited upon completion of a degree programme with one of the educational institutions. 
In-Service Training 
Under this training programme, government servants will be made aware of the importance of modern administration, administration relating to manpower, administrative procedures, budget, statistics, planning, etc. The training standard will be fixed according to the grade, ministry or department and the work of the government servants. The programme will be conducted through the medium of lectures, debates and educational films. Experience in practical application of knowledge will also be stressed. 
The training activities will take place in the present administrative training centre. For the training of lower level staff, Government will encourage the Ministries initiated training programmes . 
Reform in Personnel Management 
Training alone is not sufficient to bring about improved administration. This also requires reform in staff appointment and promotion policies. Necessary changes will be effected in the civil servant enlistment procedures. Existing personal policies and management are out of date and cannot cope with future needs. Hence, during the Plan period, consideration will be given to thee creation of a separate unit to strengthen and reorganize matters relating to personnel management. 
Administrative Procedures 
With the expansion of government activities, daily administrative procedures become more cumbersome. In order to make the procedures simple and yet effective, corresponding methods and filing systems will be studied and improved as required.special effort will be made to avoid unnecessary paper work, and to define staff responsibility and authority in a manner consistent with the functions of various administrative units . 
Maintenance of Equipment 
As administrative procedures are modernized, use of office machines is also increasing. Thus a central unit will be created for maintenance and repair as well as to provide spare for the equipment. 
Accountant Training 
The existing Accountants Training Programme will be expanded. Arrangements will be made for training accountants in variousd districts. The current training of clerical staff will be further expanded. 
Advisory Services 
One of the major factors in administrative organization at present is an advisory staff to assist high level officials in the various ministries. Such units could be effectively used in studying and providing recommendation on training, reform in administration, personnel management, data collection and related subjects. Therefore, efforts will be made during the plan period to provide an advisory staff to each ministry. 
Administrative Reform in the Industrial Sector 
Requisites for and efficient industrial administrator are different from the requirement for a general administrator. The smooth functioning of industries requires, in addition to general administrative knowledge, the knowledge of marketing, account ting, labour and related factors. Such knowledge of is every limited in the industries of Nepal which were in their initial stages of development. Nance, special attention will be given to this matter during the Plan period. In meeting short term requirements, shorts period training will be provide within the country, and industrial inspection tours in neighboring countries will be arranged so that industries in both the public and private sector will be run efficiently. For the long term, more persons will be given specialized training. These people will be sent abroad for higher educational training. 
Customs and Taxation Administration 
In order to adequately finance developmental activities, mere passing of various taxation laws will not be sufficient; rather the government will have to increase its sources of income. Taxes must be assessed on a scientific basis and condition created of their regular collection. Therefore, steps will be taken during the Plan period to improve the customs and taxation procedures of His Majesty’s Government. Since training is the given necessary training. Office builds will be provided in districts where there are no customs and taxation offices art present . 
 

CHAPTER XXX 
Sports 
 
As compared to other developing countries, Nepal is far behind in the field of sports also. After the political change of 1950 the Nepalese have shown their interest in sports by organizing various national sports organizations and national competitions. Moreover, Nepalese sportsmen have started taking part in international competition. Nepal participated for the first time in the 1964 world Olympic Games held in Tokyo, In spite of these efforts, significant progress has not yet been achieved. It would not be unfair to say that in recent years the general standard of sports in Nepal has been rather discouraging. 
One of the main reason for the current state of sports is the black of adequate encouragement provided by the government in this filed. Some steps were proposed to develop the sports during this plan. But these steps were not implemented. Therefore, during this Plan period, every effort will be made to attract the interest of the people in the field of sports. To achieve this goal, the National Council of Health and sports will be activised. In addition, programmes programmes on sports and physical education under the direction of the Education Ministry will be launched to popularize sports at the School and college level. Construction of one stadium, one auditorium and one swimming pool, which were already planned in the Second Plan, will be undertaken during this Plan period. 
 

PART III 
Implementation 
 
CHAPTER XXXI 
Improvements in Organization and management 
 
In implementing any plan, very efforts must be made to anticipate difficulties and to take steps to remove them. Although it is recognized that not all of the problems can be anticipated, there are a number of areas which clearly need attention and improvement. A few of the most critical will be discussed below. 
Annual Plans and the Development Process 
Implementation of the Five year necessarily takes places on a periodic basis through annual budgeting. Annual programmes must be submitted and incorporated in the development budget. In the submission, quarterly work programmes must be included. Because annual budgets reflect the financial resources available at the time of preparation, they cannot be fully implementation 
Annual plans must further take into account manpower, materials and other resources available. Targets for each yea, moreover, should be specified within the framework of the Five Year, Plan targets. Coordination if interrelated plans must be achieved in an annual basis as well. 
Project Preparation 
The successful formulation and implementation of any development plan depends heavily upon careful study and preparation of project and programme proposals. Unless projects are based upon a thorough study of all of the factors involved and prepared with a realistic time perspective, their implementation will run into difficulties and delays which will adversely affect development performance. Further-more, projects in such areas as irrigation and power must be selected from among a variety of alternative possibilities. Unless careful analysis takes place, the projects included in the plan may not be the ones which would provide maximum to the nation. 
Coordination at the local level 
Coordination of development activities is necessary at all levels, national, district and local, if available resources are to be most effectively utilized. Poor coordination results in scarce technically trained manpower being less than optimally utilized. Activities are delayed because of shortage of construction materials, and duplication of effort occurs. Limited coordinative efforts art the local levels have been made by district governors and other local officials. His majesty’s Government has adopted a decentralization policy which should make it possible to effectively coordinate activities at the local levels. 
Progress Reports 
       An effective reporting system is necessary to keep abreast of the progress of development activities. 
The frequency of such reports will depend on the kind of activity involved. Reports covering construction projects should be submitted more fequantly than, for example report on teacher training operations. As bottlenecks and difficulties arise and are reported necessary corrective action can be taken. Periodic inspections of projects are also necessary. In order to assure prompt corrective action when and where difficulties arise, review of many projects can be undertaken at the zonal level. A few zonal offices were established for this purpose in the Second Plan; facilities will be extended to all fo urteen zones in the Third Plan. 
 

CHAPTER XXXII 
Decentralization 
 
The importance of the panchayat system in securing mass support for national and local development programmes and the need for decentralization to further generate support have already been mentioned. In order to generate greater public support, to coordinate loc level activities and to effectively implement plans, more responsibility needs to be given the 3,600 village, 75 district and 14 zonal panchayats. During the Plan period, with the implementation of decentralization, greater authority will be given the local and district panchayat. The development of health, education, agriculture, roads and similar functions at the local level will be shifted gradually to the district panchayats. The district will, in turn, delegate many of these functions to the village panchayats. In order to achieve the objectives of decentralization, distr5ict administration will be reorganized and staff upgraded and given the necessary training. 
In order to ensure the successful implementation of decentralization, the steps must be carefully planned and actual achievements kept under continuous review. The decentra lization progrmme will therefore be undertaken in three phases. Greater power will be given the districts panachayats as the programme advances through the three phases. These have been identified as preliminary transitional and permanent. 
Preliminary Phase 
The purpose of the preliminary phase is to establish the administrative and organizational relationships necessary at the district level. The present Dichotomy between 75 separately demarcated panchayat districts and 35 administrative districts will be eliminated. The present situation is responsible for considerable confusion and overlapping responsibilities. In its place, 75 district administrative officers will be appointed, one for each panchayat district. This officer will take over the responsibilities presently given to district governors and Panachayat development officer. The district officer will be responsible to the central government through the zonal administration. 
Transitional Phase 
In the transitional phase various programmes presently operated from the centre will be transferred to the district pancahayats. In addition, all central department personnel operating at the district level will be taken into the administrative and technical staff of the district panchayats. The central department will work through the district officers rather than directly as in the past. Personnel required for the third phase will be hired and given training in the Second phase. 
Permanent Phase 
Under the third phase, effective district administrative structure will be established and staffed with well- trained personnel. All district level activities except the maintenance of law and order will be under district panchayat authority. Under this phase, local development within the guidelines set by the national government will be the responsibility of the district and village panchayats. The following will be undertaken lat the village panchayat level: 
1. 	Cadastral survey and maintenance of records on land ownership, tenancy, etc. 
2. 	Provision of production credit to tillers, marketing of agricultural products through the establishment of multipurpose cooperative societies 
3. 	Provision of agricultural extension services, in order to improve agricultural practices and increase output. 
4. 	Land revenue collection, following the abolition of the zamindar system. 
5. 	Operation and expansion of primary education. 
6. 	Provision of local health centres. 
7. 	Construction and maintenance of minor irrigation works 
Because of the costs and trained manpower required, all villages cannot be covered by permanent decentralization during the Third Plan. In the first year, the permanent phase will be implemented in a few village pancahayats in selected districts and gradually expanded in coverage over time. 
The activities will be handled by the administrative staff of the village pancahayats and the cooperative societies. The district level staff will provide technical support and guidance. 
Those decentralized activities which cannot be effectively decentralized further to the village level will be handled by the district organization. Examples are land administration, agricultural industry development. Moreover, the preparation of the annual and periodic Plans for the district will be done art the district panchayat level, which formulating such plans, the district panchayat will take into account of activities of the village panachayats. 
Implementing different phases of decentralization 
It is desirable to execute the different phases of decentralization in a planned way. The implementation of decentralization needs sufficient economic resources, training and supervision, hence it should be extended gradually. Actually the programme of permanent phase will be implemented in one district. It will then be possible to expand this to other districts on the basis of experience gained. The different stages of decentralization will be executed in the Plan period as given below. The district officer will be administratively responsible. An agricultural officer, a land officer, a public services officer, and a non-farm development officer will assist him in this work. 
Zonal Level Organizaiton 
The central government staff will operate from both the central and zonal levels. At lower levels, departmental contracts will be with the district panchayats and not directly with the professional personnel art the district and village levels. Under the decentralization programme, the zonal commissioners will have authority for the following: 
1. 	Maintenance of law and order within the zone. 
2. 	Coordinated of activities of the various central departments. 
3. 	Supervising the work of the chief District officers as it relates to His Majesty’s government and providing necessary guidance. 
4. 	Implementation of the decentralization programme within the zone. 
 

CHAPTER XXXIII 
Construciton Materials, Labour and Transport 
 
In the past, storages of construction materials, labour and transport delayed the implementation of development projects. Therefore, steps will be taken to avoid these difficulties in the future. 
Organization of Labour supply 
The number of workers engaged on development projects in 1964-65 is estimated at 50,000. By 1969-70, labour requirements are expected to rise form 300,000 to 4000,000. Many of the Second Plan projects were faced with labour shortage and resultant delays. Among these were the Trisuli Hydel, the Khageri Irrigation, the Kathmandu Drinking water and the Sonauli-Poklhara road projects. The bulk of the labour supply consists of cultivator on a part-time basis. Problems of instability of supply result since the workers leave to return to their farms at planting and harvest times. No large group of workers as yet treats construction work as permanent employment. Steps must be taken to attach the present workers more or less permanently to the non-agricultural sector. Among the steps to be taken to meet problem are: 
1. 	To establish an agency to mobilize labour, to administer labour welfare measures and to train workers. 
2. 	To opened employment exchanges in major district centres 
3. 	To provide living quarter and fair price shops in large project area. 
4. 	To provide health and education facilities near major project site. 
5. 	To resettle workers in area near construction projects. 
6. 	To establish pioneer groups for development projects. 
In this effort, close contact will be maintained with the panchayats and class organizations. Effort will also be made to utilize retired, military personnel in these activities. Mobilize training terms will train construction workers. 
Construction Materials 
Of the total Plan expenditures, it is estimated that some 45 per cent or Rs. 1,000million will be sent on construction. Necessary construction materials must be made available at or near the project sites as needed. In order to accomplish this, data are necessary on quantities of material required, the amo8unt locally available and required imports. 
 
Although the above figures may appear to be excessively high in the light of past experience, these quantities are required to implement the development projects. During the Second Plan, for example, 100,000 tons of cement was used. By comparison, the 570,000 tons for the Third Plan may appear too high, but more and larger projects requiring cement have been included in the Third Plan. 
During the Second Plan, 15,000 tons of iron rods and 16,000 bundles of corrugated sheets were used. During the Third Plan 70,000 tons of iron rods and 100,000 bundles of corrugated will be needed. The National Trading Corporation will be responsible for importing the bulk of these supplies. 
Nepal has a substantial volume of timber resources. The present sawmilling capacity is some 17010 thousand cubic feet per year. The Timber Corporation of Nepal plans to increase its capacity by some 5 lakh cubic feet during the Third Plan. By 1970, total production capacity in Nepal is expected to rise to 3000 cubic feet per year. Therefore, 6,500,000 cubic feet estimated requirement can be easily met. 
Brick production presently is wholly on a village industry basis. Data on brick production capacity are not available. Strong steps must be taken to expand brick production to meet the requirement. A brick and tile factory will be established in Kathmandu with as annual capacity of 30 million bricks and 2.5 million tiles. 
Aside form these construction materials, lime, glass and other components are also required. Heavy equipment requirement will be estimated and steps taken to ensure an adequate supply. 
The material requirements discussed above do not include the quantities to be importee into Nepal directly by the aid-giving nations for use of projects with which they are associated. Among these are the East- West Highway, the Sonaul-Pokhara Road, the Trisuli Hydel Project the Chatra Cannel and the Kathmandu – Kodari Road. India, the USSR, China, the United States and other nation will be providing a part of their assistance in this fashion. 
Transportation 
It is essential to provide transport in order to have materials available for the smoother execution of development activities in the public and private sectors. In the past Plans, many targets could not be achieved because of transportation bottleneck. Even to-day, scheduled arrival of materials as regard is major problem. 
The estimated materials requirements for the Third Plan for cement, iron, corrugate sheets and timber are 5,70,000 tons, 100,000 bundles and 6,600,000 cubic feet respectively. 
The volume of goods which must be transported into Nepal and to points with in Nepal will increase during the Third Plan. This reflects not only the increase in the volume of construction materials which will be needed but also the movement of food grains and the increased consumers’ goods which will be purchased as income levels rise. Most of the major development projects are located in the Terai. North India rail and truck facilities will be used to deliver these goods to the border. In the hill areas where roads are still not developed will be utilized. 
One possible sources of delay is the clearance of goods for Nepal through Calcutta ports. In order to expedite clearance, a clearing and forwarding section will be created within the National Transport Corporation. 
This corporation will work on behalf of the various projects and help to clear the foods from Calcutta 
port. 
Even in kathmandu Valley, which has good transport connection with India, there were storages of supplies during the Second Plan because of transport limitations. In 1965-66, an average of 700 tons of goods per day is expected to move into Kathmandu. This is expected to rise to 1,000 tons per day by 1970. This total includes all goods, not just construction materials. The elimination of transport bottlenecks is essential not only to ensure a smooth flow a\of material to development projects but also to help stabilize market price in the Valley. 
The condition of the Raxaul-Amlekhgunj railway is very critical. It can no longer be depended upon as a reliable means of transport but should be used to the maximum extent possible. 
The Kathmandu-Hetauda ropeway started operation in April. 1964 and has been working only one shift carrying an average of 200 tons per day. In the first year of the Third Plan, the ropeway operations will be 
expanded to three shifts (24 hours) with a capacity of 600 tons daily. For, this, the job training programme has been under way and will be completed in the First year of the Third Plan. 
The Nepal Transport Corporation will utilize the Raxaul-Amlikhgunj railway, 300 trucks and the ropeway to transport 1000 tons of goods per day from Birgunj to Kathmandu. 
The transport facilities will expand over the Plan period. To ensure their maximum use and to provide facilities throughout the country, a transport Organization was established. 
It will help to achieve the targets set forth in the plan. The transport organizations activities will coordinate with other organizations dealing with transport such as RNAC and the National Transport Corporation. 
 

